Artist: Ayahuasca
Song: New Moon
Year: 1994

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark, A.K.A. DJ Solitare, here with episode three of my series Retro Goa Explorations, in which I explore some of the music of the 90s that I think were foundational, not just in my own experience, although it's from that perspective, but really in the scene overall and what it is that makes this music so great and still great, almost 30 years later.

Today's episode is going to focus on a track from the very first compilation that I bought back late in 1994, and I remember the situation very well. I was at one of the Odyssey parties that were put on by Jay and Maury, an American and Japanese couple were both fantastic DJs. I mentioned Jay last time, and they had these parties happening every two weeks. And it was really Olli Wisdom's party, that October 15th party in 1994, that really, you know, sort of blew the lid off and gave me that really full immersion into some of what I thought the scene could be.

And then I was going every two weeks to these parties that Jay and Maury were throwing, and they were fantastic. There was a great vibe, and they started building slowly. And they took place in a residential neighborhood in Tokyo, in the basement of a photo studio. And so, because of that location, it was only people who knew about it who were going, so there are no stragglers. It was a very dedicated crowd. It was word of mouth, and people who found the flyers that started getting more and more beautifully decorated as time went on.

And I was on the dance floor, and it was probably, it was either late November, and I know the party on November 19th, 94, was with Tsuyoshi Suzuki. The first time I heard him, and then might have been the one two weeks later, but it was one of these two. When a friend of mine, Mark, name you can trust, leaned over, saw me, you know, dancing full on to some track, and he said, "Oh, if this is the kind of music you like, you'll probably like the label Dragonfly. So go check them out." And he said, "There's a shop in Shibuya," and I must have just connected with him. We knew each other socially later to double check on all of that.

So I went to this shop, and I remember that it was early December when I actually got to the shop in Shibuya called Cisco. And this was—I mean—it was a major spot for buying all of this stuff on vinyl and CD. I would later find out. There's photos of a lot of the great visiting artists who went there? And I went in, and I was just looking around, and I looked down, and I saw this, and I was like, "Ooh, that must be it, right?" And I couldn't necessarily tell, but I assumed it was. And then, of course, I saw a track by Hallucinogen saying LSD, and I was like, "Oh, might be on the right path over here." So I bought the CD, and the these were twenty five dollars back then. It was about twenty five hundred yen, which you know today's conversion it would probably be about double. So it was pretty expensive, but that was fine. It was a different economic ecosystem over there, and I bought the CD, and I had my portable CD player with me.

So to do a little more archaeology. Those who don't know, they had portable cassette players called Walkman. With you know, you'd put your sort of little headphones over. They're furry little things at the time, not these little earbuds. And I got a Discman, which was the CD version. And I plopped the CD in, and from the very first notes, I was like, Oh my gosh, I can actually hear this music that I've Have been going to these parties to hear on my own, so it was all very exciting. And the CD didn't leave the CD player for weeks, and except when I was playing it at home.

And of course, I loved them all, and I'm going to feature several of the tracks from the CD in this series. But I'm actually starting with one of the lesser-known ones, I think, comparatively, and with the last track, which is New Moon by Ayahuasca. I was a little bit inspired by the fact that this weekend we have a full moon. Sorry, a New Moon. Is that for a little slip? Used to have full moon parties, but this is a track called New Moon, and I'm going to be airing this on the New Moon weekend.

And it's by the project Ayahuasca, which you know at the time, I had no idea who any of these people were, and I've since found out, and I know all three musicians. So this was a trio of folks from Brighton. There was Steve Ronan and Dino Psaras, who had been friends in school, and Joti Sidhu. They were all Brighton lads, and Steve and Dino had known each other since school. And in 1992, Dino and his brother went to Goa, and they came back, and they're like, "This is it." And so they started making some music together, the three of them, in '93.

And this was made at Butterfly Studios, which is where a lot of stuff was being made in Brixton. This is where Simon Posford was working as an engineer when he produced those Infinity Project tracks, or when he was engineering them, I should say. And a lot of the tracks were being made there, legendary studio, and it came out then in 1994 on this incredible compilation, which by the way was produced by Simon Holtom, who in late 1996 would leave Dragonfly to become the manager of Twisted Records when Hallucinogen Again, Simon Posford started his own label, Twisted Records, and Simon Holtom is still manager of that fantastic label. But kudos to Simon because holy moly, I think one of the best compilations ever. And just each track is a killer, and this last one is wonderful.

And I've stated before that I don't have, I can't say for certain which tracks I heard at that first party of Olli Wisdom's because it was all so new and unfamiliar. But there were certain kinds of sounds and impressions that really struck me, and there are several of those sounds in this New Moon track that I'm pretty sure, given the timeline, that Olli Wisdom would have played this one. And it was just—it was just that kind of impression that I had. So I really wanted to play this one here.

So that trio of Ayahuasca only produced five tracks. This one on Dragonfly, and then they had four other tracks which came out on what I think is the second CD that I bought, which was Concept in Dance, first volume, Digital Alchemy, and again some killer tracks. Some of them made with Man With No Name and engineered by him. This one was engineered by Natalie, whoever she was. Steve told me she's the one who set everything up, and her name's in the credits over there. So thanks, Natalie, and thanks, Steve, Dino, and Joti for producing this amazing track.

They, after those five tracks, they went their separate ways, and Steve and Dino became Cydonia, and then later on were producing music with a third member, Ian Rive, and Joti did his, of course, legendary Psychaos project. And we hear elements that we would later hear in those two projects in this track.

There's a lot of fantastic stuff going on in this track, and I want to point out, like I did with The Infinity Project one, first the what the baseline is like, and the baseline has this syncopated groove that's very much part of Joti's language. When you hear Psychaos basslines, you hear something. There's always something that's on an offbeat. So if you think one, two, three, four, then there's one and two and three and four and there's always something on one of the ends as well. And that gives it a whole other life. I think it's just absolutely fantastic.

So we're going to listen to this. I just want you to pay attention to that baseline first, because again, it's one of the characteristics of the tracks where the baselines were all so different. And I'll again talk over the track, talk a little bit about what it is that I'm hearing, and then we'll wrap up and I'll present the track on its own without me yapping over it.

Okay, so here we go, New Moon by Ayahuasca. Notice the rhythm. Notice the lightness. I love that there's a buoyancy, there's a lightness to it, so it's not heavy. The kick is quite high too, not a super deep bass, and it's just got a celebratory, upbeat kind of bounce, which I think adds to that carnival-like atmosphere that I've talked about before.

And then now we've got that second voice. We've got those two voices happening simultaneously. A rubbery kind of thing above. And every eight bars something else happens. A little cymbal crash. I just love the polyphonic, the sort of multiple layers happening simultaneously. Another crash, and then it just deepens. I mean, you know, there's this hypnotic groove you get into when the same material is presented and then later presented with a bit of variation.

A little drum build up, and then these amazing sounds. It just sounds very otherworldly, and you can't have any image of what's producing the sound. It's got this kind of almost metal nasal kind of sound to it, much higher register. You notice how we have something happening like on the mid and high level, and they sound really connected, so it really adds dimensionality to them.

And then all these really spacey sounds, so I mean you really sound like you're in space, and that was kind of one of those impressions I had at that party of Olli Wisdom's. Like you just you're listening to the sounds of space, and then just that little riff coming in, and then just that one note punctuated going over and over again like this cosmic Morse code.

Yep, some nice choral voices, like some again some celestial angels. Beautiful little progression there. There's something so exclamatory and celebratory about this little riff here. It's just like affirming something. Again, like all of these riffs have a message, right? It's just this joyous exclamatory celebration.

Got a little drum build up coming up here, and that. This oscillating. This is really something I remember from that party. Just that back and forth quality, feels kind of chopped up. Now the articulation sounds a little bit different, sounds a little drier with that one note repeating.

There's one more around. You hear all the layers so clearly right it's just like classical music like they're all these different sounds at the same time and then this amazing pause and then another cosmic kind of sound back to that bounce a little rhythmic element.

We've also got these kind of little maracas going on over here, just adding a little bit of a that carnival kind of celebratory sound in that upper register. Drums coming in again. Notice how up it is, right? I mean, with that rhythm, with the frequency of the kick and the sense baseline and just that bouncing sound goes up it comes down you just started following this right and you just start being aware of these waves of motion going up and down that is beautiful.

Just like had been done in Stellium, right, where the intro was chopped up. Here, it's this part. Then again, this exclamatory riff. Just really joyous, isn't it? Building up again. And you know when you hear this on a big system, it's different too, right? Like the sounds are just bouncing all over the place.

And that second presentation is somewhat different. Third round before it wraps up. Beautiful sound again, and then that great, spacey sound to take you out, And then with creative DAT mixing, you would mix into the next track. Kind of cool, huh? I think that's an absolutely blinding track.

I just think that buoyancy, that bounce that you have, the the way the different musical content works simultaneously. That's you know polyphonic, so multiple sounds is a musical term, and counterpoint is one using classical music to talk specifically about the music of Bach, the composer lived 1685 to 1750, who was the expert at writing different musical content that would then play over, you know, two, three, four parts, and he would flip them around and turn them upside down and do all kinds of things.

I had no doubt, and I still have no doubt. You know, when I was at that party, he came to mind, and I just said, "Wow, if this guy, you know, if he'd been had this kind of equipment when he was alive, he would be writing this kind of music." So all of those layers just play together so beautifully, and there's just this uplifting bounce.

You know, the textures are never too thick; it's not too dense. And a lot of people who listen now can just say, "Oh, you know, well the engineering is so basic," or they can complain about that, you know, on that technical level, but it's not about that. It's about the vibe, and there is something really great about the fact that you're not—you know—it's not so separate. Like the sounds, there's this interplay between the sounds that's very different when it's done just on computers instead of using actual equipment nowadays.

I just wanted to add also that there were different mixes of the track. Like many artists, they wouldn't just do one attempt at it because they were working on the synth and had to preset everything, and they couldn't produce another track until they'd finish that one because they'd lose where everything was. But they'd go through different sounds and different, you know, do different experiments and decide which version, right? So they'd record several versions, and an early version of this sounds quite different.

It's got a different kind of baseline, and you know, a lot of people think because I've helped—I mean, they might think this as well—that also I've helped release some unpublished mixes. It's fascinating to hear them. Sometimes they're better, and sometimes they're not, and it can be a matter of opinion. I happen to think that the released version, the one we just listened to, is really the best of all the versions I've heard.

There's so there's two other versions. One is a radically different mix, and it's much shorter. It's about just five and a half minutes, five minutes forty-two. There's another one that was titled the original Dragonfly mix. Then there's original Dragonfly mix two is pretty much the same structure as this one. Some of the sounds are a bit different, and the engineering is a bit different. And then there's this final one. I'm not sure if there were other versions. That's just the only ones I've heard.

But I'll just highlight. I'll just highlight now, so you can hear just a little bit of that first version. You can hear that there's a little bit of an intro coming in here, and you'll just notice that the baseline is very different. And you know, I think the new one is better, or the real one is better, the real one. It's still cool, still got its cool rhythm and syncopation. Bit of for a kick, right? A different kind of atmosphere, and you know it can work great.

What else do I have to say about the released one? Is great. It's a melody, so different structure. It's kind of cool, but I think we should celebrate the released version because it's just so fantastic. A phenomenal track by three great musicians, all of whom are still playing today, still producing. So fantastic stuff.

So kudos again to those three musicians. Kudos to Simon Holtom for having produced this unbelievable compilation. And let's, I'll sign off over here and present the track without me talking over it.

All right. Thank you for tuning in. Hope you enjoyed it. Enjoy the New Moon that we're having this weekend astrologically, and enjoy this brilliant track by Ayahuasca called New Moon. Over and out for now. We'll be right back.
