Artist: Total Eclipse
Song: Aliens
Year: 1994

Hey there, goa fans! Mark, aka DJ Solitare, here with episode four of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I discuss and share some of my insights and thoughts about some of the great music of the 90s. Today is going to be yet another track from the absolutely phenomenal compilation—the first one that I got, the Dragonfly compilation Order Odonata. Every track on here is a killer, and I'm probably going to be featuring several, several of them. Last time, there was we did Ayahuasca's New Moon, and today it's going to be a project that is very close to me because I knew them well and heard them a lot of times, and it's the only project who has two tracks on this CD, which is very interesting, is Total Eclipse, and we're going to listen to their track "Aliens."

Now, it was really hard for me to choose which track to feature. It always is. I mean, you know, listen, I I love so much of this old music, and each track has its own unique flavor, and that's again one of the things that makes them all such long-standing favorites. And Total Eclipse. Longstanding favorites, and Total Eclipse is quite special for me because I heard them probably more than any other project in the 90s.

Stefan from Total Eclipse, one of the trio of Steph, Serge, and Loïc. Stefan had moved to Japan With the same week that I moved there for the second time in 1998, and we saw each other almost weekly in Tokyo in the 98 to 99 period, and I also heard them live many times. I was at their first Japanese live in 1996. It was the one outdoor party that Jay and Mayuri from Odyssey threw, Tribal planet, really incredible party though. Really challenging because the cold and moisture caused the computer to shut down a couple of times. I had actually heard Serge a year before. It was in May nineteen ninety five, and heard him DJ, and that was an absolutely incredible experience as well.

But I knew their music first through CDs, and you know back in the day, as I said, you'd buy a lot of these CDs, and the same artists would appear on different labels. And so you know they had some stuff later coming out on TIP, but on this first CD that I got, Dragonfly, there were two tracks. There's Aliens and Sound Is Solid. Both fantastic productions, and both completely different.

And this is the thing that I think stands Total Eclipse apart from pretty much every project in the scene. Not entirely, because I think there are a couple of other ones, but Total Eclipse had so many different styles within their productions, so many different flavors. They did incredible morning music. They had a lot of cyber rock kind of stuff. They had these very aerated sort of tracks, really driving nighttime tracks. A lot of different flavors. X-Dream, we could argue, also had incredible variety, but I think Total Eclipse was one that really stood out as having so many different styles that work in so many different parts of, you know, if you look at the grand arc of a story, of a party, in terms of how the music can be put together, they were the ones that I think, for me, you know, in their live sets, which all sounded very different, you know, because they were doing real live adjustments and with different synth sounds and so on. I I was just always extremely satisfied by Total Eclipse productions.

That said, this might be a little controversial, but hear me out. I was a little disappointed when their first album came out on Blue Room because the tracks that were on there there was a variety, but in general, it had some of that rougher, more granular sound that you hear in some of their productions, and I wanted to have a little bit more of that variety of sound, like we're going to hear, you know, you can hear in both tracks on this Dragonfly compilation, and then there's a lot of other ones as well that have that more really streamlined, fluid kind of evocative sound. So that's just me. I mean, of course, there's lots of great stuff on there, but just as a flow, I was after a little something different. But incredible project. Love them dearly.

And so, as I was saying, I was present at a lot of events that they played. So starting with that one in '96, and then once Steph Moved to Japan. They played in Japan a couple of times in '98, '99. I was there at Solipse, and in fact, this Total Eclipse festival in Hungary, which was basically became the first Ozora in a way, without that name. And Steph had actually passed me off to the promoter as one of their engineers, so I ended up being housed with them. And then, you know, the day of the eclipse, ended up watching the Total Eclipse with Total Eclipse, which was, believe me, quite meta.

But you know, I just always enjoyed the fact that you never knew what to expect. You always knew it was going to be great, and you always knew there was going to be something different. And this is what's just so fabulous about their their music.

And this track, Aliens, I think, works incredibly well for several reasons. Largely, the theme, where it really has that alien kind of quality to it, and then again the structure and the layering, where you have all these individual independent voices that all fit together so well, so they play together well, and this is you know that counterpoint or polyphony that I've spoken to in other videos, that I think stands this kind of goa style psychedelic music apart from a lot of other genres. You don't need to mix two tracks together to make something. Each track is already more complex than other styles where you mix two tracks together in order to get some complexity.

And you know, when you have those different voices that play together so well, it becomes what a party is like. You have this person over here dancing with this person, dancing with this person, and the music itself has all these different lines and elements dancing together and coming in and out, sort of like it is on the dance floor when you know you come together with different people and you move around, and then you're with someone else, and then later on you're with another person. So it starts to become an embodiment, in a sense, of the spirit of these interactions at these events.

So before we start, I just want to name that Stefan had told me because you know we discussed music at great length, but he told me that they were always very mindful of the spoken samples that they put in their tracks, that it was meant very specifically to open up a certain concept and create a certain response in the consciousness of the person who's listening, dancing to it. So you know it totally makes sense when you listen to this one, talking about aliens. You know when you were at these clubs and parties back then, indoors and outdoors, that were decorated like a really extraterrestrial environment. You know, really otherworldly, and especially dancing under the stars, listening to this kind of music. It definitely put you in mind of other realms, other modes of consciousness. The fact that there could so easily be other beings living elsewhere or somewhere.

So why don't we listen? Let's give this track a listen. I'll have a couple of little details to share afterwards, and of course during, and at the end of the video, I will share the track without my talking. So let's get started.

I love this sort of mysterious introduction. Notice again that rhythmic bassline, just something we've heard in the other tracks so far. Not the steady one, two, three, four rhythm, while that whoosh is going on. Off super deep right Total Eclipse had a lot of different kicks a lot of heart chakra kicks this is quite different from them and for a lot of the other stuff that we hear you know where it's really quite high and percussive uh really effective kind of quasi melodic quasi percussive while you still have that beautiful harmonic. You know, again, all of these stems just sound like this quantum pattern on a big system. It just sounds like you're listening to some mathematical equation.

We'll get back to that percussive element. Not quite sure what to call it. It's really exciting, just the way this... the dance floor is just so slow with this. And I just love that harmonic interplay between that upper part and that bassline. Notice the pause there. And then comes one of those wonderful the aerated sounds and beautiful melodic riffs, that's such a totally good thing. Where did it come from? That sample coming in there, and then that beautiful chord. They had the best chord progressions. That little, little noodling coming in there. And notice all the different layers that are happening simultaneously. It's just amazing.

You know, these are all elements that we've heard before. The arrangement is really organic and creative. And then the kick drops out here for this little break, but it's all musical content that we've heard before. It's not like modern tracks that present new material in a break. This builds the tension more. The way that bassline comes in again, percussion here, incredibly evocative, wonderful breath. It's an incredibly evocative, wonderful riff. And you know, a lot of complexity if you think about that upper riff and that lower one. They both play fantastic.

And that pad from the end there. With this cosmic kind of hand flute or something like that. Stopping the kick but keeping the baseline going and building it up. Those questions. This place will just explode whenever you play this. Really brilliant structuring, isn't it? It really becomes a story. That riff again. It just drops out, and then we're just left like that.

And of course, there would be some creative DAT mixing. Again, these tracks were constructed to be able to be mixed, where a lot of the riffs drop out. There's Just a couple of things going, and that's where you would bring something else in.

What a phenomenal, phenomenal track! Again, different from anything else that they wrote, in a way, because they had so many different styles. You know that real clanging that's going on, kind of almost relentless at the top, but with that beautiful harmonic bassline and all of those other riffs and that thunderbolt that shoots through occasionally. Absolutely incredible!

This was a real popular one, one of the favorites of Jay at Odyssey, as I told you. And I just want to share here a video clip. So there's not a whole lot of footage that we have from back in the day, but this one party was did have some film. I managed to get my hands on it, and it was in may 1995. So this is within my first year of attending parties, and Jay played Aliens as he often did, and the video jumps around a little bit, but oh boy, you can see how the place explodes. Check this out. Some pretty electric stuff, eh? So, I mean, the strobe lights are so fantastic with that. It was, and you just hear how people are yelping and hollering. And just a phenomenal, phenomenal track with incredible energy. Really used to get the dance floor happening! Amazing production by Total Eclipse, as we expect.

So, so that's it. What do you think? Quite a track. I think on so many levels, the spoken samples to do with aliens, and you know, as as questions, just sort of getting your mind, you know, the whole consciousness sort of brewing. Then that whole combination of rhythm and harmonic, different kind of harmonic stems, and then that sort of percussive, you know, exclamation that's going on in that upper level, and that thunderbolt that shoots through, just phenomenal stuff, brilliant structuring, absolute masterpiece, one of the all-time greats. So Total Eclipse, brilliant production, aliens. I'll sign off here and let you have a listen to the full track without my talking over it. Hope you enjoy, and I'll see you next time.
