Artist: Arcturus
Song: 1000 Planets
Year: 1994

Hey there, goa fans! Mark, aka DJ Solitare, here with episode seven of Retro Goa Explorations. This track is the only released track that I know of by this particular project, and the two musicians from this project went on to have their very successful solo projects. Absolutely brilliant musicians. We have Joti Sidhu, who was the head honcho of and mastermind, I should say, behind Psychaos, and then there is Paul Jackson, who was the phenomenal musical mind behind Voodoo People, and together they had a very brief collaboration as Arcturus, and the one released track that I know of, and I know there is one unreleased one which I've gotten is also fantastic, but that's not what we're focusing on today. This is Thousand Planets, and it is the second track on that ever classic Dragonfly Order Odonata Volume One.

Now the title is so perfect, as are the samples, as is everything about the track—I mean, it's just killer—and there's a lot of things that it's got going for it. There's a lot of alien sounds in the sense that doesn't—none of it sounds terrestrial, right? One of the things about this music and this really electronic-sounding music is it doesn't—the sounds don't bring to mind any earthy instruments, right? Like you hear a violin, you imagine a violin. You hear a piano, you imagine a piano. There's nothing that really comes to mind when you hear these sounds, unless you're a producer and you've worked with this music and you say, "Oh, that's that's the sound," or "That's that sound." Not the case here. And sometimes ignorance really is bliss. And so the sounds have, you know, there's notes that are played, but some of them are only pitched. So we hear sounds that don't correspond to the notes on a musical scale, but they just have sound tonality, like a sound that goes up and goes down, and it has a certain frequency, but it's not pitched as most conventional musical instruments are. And that's one of the things that gives it this kind of otherworldly flavor.

They've also chosen fantastic spoken samples that really communicate a lot of the mindset of considering a life beyond our planet. So I'm sure this is one of the tracks that Olli Wisdom would have played at that first party that I was at in late '94. But yeah, this is just exactly that kind of atmosphere. Absolutely brilliant track.

So, what do you say? I'm just going to put it on. I'll do a little bit of talking while the track plays, just pointing out this or that, and then I'll present the track afterwards, complete. Okay, here we go. Thousand Planets.

Ah, one more note. BPM is only 132. Now this is exceptionally slow by today's standards. Everything tends to be, you know, 140 and up. Average tends to be about 145 these days. So 132 sounds slow to modern ears, but when you listen to this track, I don't think it sounds slow. It really sounds pretty pumping. So there's a lot of reasons behind that, but I think this is kind of amazing to consider. So let's listen.

A thousand planets. There's a thousand planets out there. So again, we have this bass line that's rhythmic. It's not all on the beat, and the harmony includes a minor third. And this kick comes in beautiful. And this, we've got this sound going up, and then it goes down, and it's rhythmic, syncopated. So now on the beat. So this up and down figuration is just like these waves, like everything in life consists of waves, sound waves, light waves, and so on. So you simultaneously have this pitched, syncopated bassline that includes a minor third, and then that up and down kind of more optimistic dare I say quality. Both can be heard super clearly, as can the kick. Beautiful spacey sounds.

And now, gorgeous riff. Again, it's got just a little bit of a it has a fancy rhythm to it, just a little bit offbeat. It has a little bit of a dancey rhythm to it, just a little bit off-beat. Beautiful harmonic element to it. So again, the rhythm not just being on each of the strong beats. And so there's a real playful quality to it, right? Really joyful, super swishy. This kind of gnarly kind of sound in there. So you know they're working with all of the frequency levels really well, which actually ties in with something that's coming up.

Now another riff. Now another lick. These arpeggios. Another pattern is going up and down. This one is with tones, not just with atonal pitches. And here. And here, that beautiful little riff has a really floaty quality to it, a bit of a sheet metal kind of sound to it, so that different texture really adds some more dimension. Again, notice how it's all stuff we've been presented with in addition with this new piece, and they all play well together.

Kick drops out a little bit. Now comes back. And then this brilliant sample right here. What That's a great way to trip you out. And this positive association of clearing your own channels and frequencies. That's kind of what this up and down I think figurations can do.

Now there's this little playful kind of little riff there. And that comes back. There's also a question and answer intonation to it, it goes up, it goes down, so vocal intonation does that, up and then down, question and answer. All of these elements with different rhythms, not all of them fully based on the strong beats, and it all playing together well.

Whoosh! And you know, there's this upbeat, even though there's that minor third as part of the bassline. There's a very upbeat energy to the track. Sound of that little drum-like thing. That's beautiful. Up and down stuff. Other sounds kind of gnarly. Sort of like rev your engines, rev your UFO engine. Add some rhythm as well as texture.

Comes back. Again, that sort of floaty, sheet metal kind of sound. So long. I'm just dropping in that fantastic sample. I love the shifting in the accents as well as the rhythm.

Let's start it from the top and coming down now. Great harmonic and melodic bits coming together. One more round, I think, and then it's supposed to wrap up. I just have that little bit coming, going up and down. What a killer! And so many elements that are working there.

There's the buoyant rhythm, the minor third. There's three notes in the bass line, but there's a minor third in there, which adds that sort of mystical sort of quality, and yet there's a lot of major key stuff going on above. So it's that dance between major and minor. There's the musical toned riffs that are happening, plus there's the pitched stuff that doesn't have tones like musical keys associated with it simultaneously working. With it, simultaneously working, everything has something that has a rhythmic variance, and so all of those things give a sense of propulsion, as well as the lightness of the tracking, how everything is overlaid and worked works together, absolutely jaw droppingly phenomenal, and 132 BPM, right?

So you know that Star Trek sample was it all all channels and frequencies clear? Brilliant way to drop it in, and you don't need to know that it's from Star Trek to be able to appreciate it, right? It's a sample that doesn't have to have earthly cultural ties to it. The message itself about channels and frequencies being clear works on, you know, if you think about your energy system having channels and frequencies and clearing that, and then you just imagine, you know, you being able to psychedelically, cosmically, psychically connect on other channels and frequencies, and it just works on a whole lot of levels. So the words on their own makes make great sense, as well as that there's a thousand planets out there, and when you're in that open-minded trance-like state. Especially listening to this kind of music and with the right decor, and if you're under the stars, I mean, it all just really comes together.

So phenomenal production by Joti Sidhu of Psychaos and Paul Jackson of Voodoo People, both of whom will be featured for some of their amazing tracks in upcoming episodes. But for now, going to wrap up and present on its own the brilliant Arcturus track that they created, "1000 Planets." DJ Solitare signing off for now. Catch you next time.

There's a thousand planets out there. All channels and frequencies clear. There's a thousand planets out there.
