Artist: Prana
Song: Indigo
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark, A.K.A. DJ Solitaire, here with episode eight of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I present and discuss some of the best Goa trance tracks from the mid to late 90s.

We are still in the 94-95 season, my first year in the scene, and we're going to look at a track today that was on that first mixtape that Jay gave me, Jay from the Odyssey Parties in Tokyo, that he gave me soon after my birthday, soon after my late November birthday in '94. Possibly it was early December.

And this is a track by the legendary project Prana, which at the time consisted of Toshi Suzuki, who is a legendary still DJ, and his partner in crime Nick Taylor. Now, the previous incarnation of this project started off as Bliss, together with Takahiro Tokuda, and then morphed into Taiyo, where they had one track that was released with Takahiro and a couple of other tracks with Chris Decker from Medicine Drum, who was the founder of Return to the Source, where Tsuyoshi became a resident DJ at the regular parties starting, I believe, in 1994. And those tracks were issued on this EP on Step Two House. Now it's called an EP, but it's seven full-length tracks, which is basically an album. And there's at least one of them on here that I'm definitely going to be referring to later on.

But the band changed their name from Tayo to Prana, even though their Prana album that came out in '96 consists of a lot of tracks produced in '94 as well as '95, and includes "Tayo" as a track itself on the is the last track of the album, but the "Indigo" remix, which is the one we're looking at today, is also on this album. But was produced in 1994. There's an earlier mix of "Indigo" with which it was paired, as well as a couple of other tracks on an InterOne vinyl that was released in December '94, and so this is around when Jay made that mixtape for me.

And Sioshi had just visited Tokyo. I first heard him November nineteenth, nineteen ninety four, at an Odyssey party that Jay had thrown. So Jay probably got a promo from Sioshi as well at the time, and therefore put it in his mix, and possibly because of how Jay sequenced this, really at like a kind of the climactic moment on the second side of the tape, it's one of the reasons that I love it so much.

But it's really an astounding track that has so much going on, has some of those really otherworldly qualities that were in the first track in the series, *Stellium*, which was one that Nick Taylor did, I believe, once he was back in Australia, together with Ray Castle. That was episode one. Be sure to check that one out for sure.

But there's a whole lot going on in this track. Very otherworldly sounds, the whole storyline, lots of percussive elements, rhythmic elements, and really some linguistic sounds and I think this is something that's really missing nowadays. I think a lot of folks are making music with computers that doesn't sound like computerized music per se. So it's lacking some of that really electronic sound per se. And what I think is really lacking, especially, is a linguistic quality. Again, refer back to a couple of the other episodes, including that Stelium one, where the voices sound like, you know, the different lines sound like something that's spoken by some kind of entity who speaks another language.

And when you're there, listening on a large system in an altered sort of trance-like state through the music and sound, and maybe being outdoors, you're really hearing things differently. And on a larger system as well, you're hearing things differently. And I'll just drop in this point here as a general piece. I think that nowadays people listen a lot at home; they listen on earbuds or headphones or things like that, and the relationship with the music is completely different when you're listening on speakers that are smaller than your body, than when you're listening on speakers where they're much bigger than your body and outdoors, and those sound waves, together with the air and so on, are all circulating.

So, the way you hear all of these layers and all, each component, each line, for lack of a better term, if it was written in musical notation, they would each have their own line happening simultaneously, sort of like a musical score. You've ever seen an orchestral score where you know each instrument and so on is on a separate line, all happening simultaneously. All of those lines sound really different when they're heard at an event on a large system, and so you know we're fortunate that we're able to share as much music as we can now, and that we can listen in the comforts of our own home. But it's also very, very different.

So I'm going to be highlighting a few of these the qualities, which is specifically in this track, I think some of the voice-like characteristics of some of the different lines. So now, just to clarify as well, in terms of the track itself, so there was an earlier mix of Indigo, also produced in '94, I suspect, and then this remix, which was produced in '94, both at the Keba Studio in London, and the title likely coming from. There was Neither Siohshi nor Nick had very clear memories on this, but Antara at Return to the Source had taken everyone through a chakra journey, and there is that release on the Return to the Source label where they have tracks that match each key of each of the seven energy centers of the body or chakras, which are the seven major tones of a scale at the major scale, and so it seems likely that that was something to do with the inspiration that they weren't entirely clear of it. That seems likely, and hey, why not? In any case, absolutely incredible track. Let's give it a listen.

This rhythmic element and this comes out of nowhere and goes into nowhere. Somewhere else, the percussive rhythmic element that came in there, and now this other voice. That repetition has a mantra-like effect, so that helps create some of that trance-like state. More percussion here. And again, you know the percussion doesn't sound like human, earthy kind of percussion. It's just more simulating that kind of thing.

And then tim, and then this sound. If you trigger tracks, carab, related to that. Fantastic up and down figurations here. So just going up, going down in pitch, but not using any of the tones from the scales. It just gives a point of reference of change. State can take on some dimensionality and sound like a bit of a close encounter of the third kind message, and then you have those whooshes, sound like spaceships whizzing by, like you're in Star Wars, or and then again another great riff and more of that cosmic ambulance kind of sound.

Fascinating structure, all these pieces coming. Beautifully layered, and building up to this climactic moment. Keeps building, and the band is fading out. It's all building up to this bit right here. Super amazing, high energy, otherworldly, alien-coded message coming in here.

Pause after the first beat, and now it goes through a variation and doesn't stop. While we have that cosmic screech going on incredible momentum with both the tonality and that non-stop rhythm still some of those spacey sounds happening that's done another pause notice again how they're on different planes and we can hear them both so clearly.

Those are bushes. And those are bushes. And now, another climactic point. Really exclamatory, affirmational, uplifting riff. It's just one motif that's repeated over and over again, it doesn't sound like that. It doesn't sound boring, right? It just really just goes through its own shifts in sequencing.

And again, every eight bars, something else starts happening. Just these complete alien sounds, just like this one, just give you this one sentence here. And we're back into that. That's it for that message. That was just there, just there that once in the whole track.

And again, this is just this kind of almost insistent little message over here. It's reinforcing this idea. That beautiful harmonic riff. Then we get that again, that rhythmic morse code bit happening there. Another little atonal thing just kind of thrown in there for some dimension and mysticism just those tones just dancing around and then here again just these harmonic patterns where the notes it's become more than notes. I mean, it really becomes something coded. Where the notes become more than notes. I mean, they really become some encoded message.

And now this atonal interval happening with that riff. Just these waves. And you know, your body is what's picking up what's happening on the lower end as you dance, right? So you're left we're really picking up the stuff that's on the mid to upper range when you're dancing to the top after that rhythmic pattern now cascading waves one more round I believe and then we'll start dropping it out.

This is a little bit of an intergalactic bongo sound, with some of those higher voices again. I just this sort of spaceship kind of sound. It's really something, isn't it? Uh, that is definitely not music. It sounds like anything thing to do with this planet, which is really what that altered state is like when you start tapping into the larger expanse of consciousness and having what exists beyond the realms and limitations and structures that we normally live in.

That's what a lot of these parties really seemed like to me. That sort of every weekend you would gather and go to this temporary autonomous zone, as Heike Bay referred to it, where you were just sort of safely enclosed, and then you were exposed to something that reminded you of what exists beyond the structures that we normally live in.

And you know, every spiritual tradition has used sound, and I use the spiritual term loosely and a bit hesitatively because of the associations that people have with that, but that was something that was really important for people to—it's always been—to step out of our normal constructs and our normal routines and expose ourselves to something that's vaster.

And there's just so many sounds here that remind one, I think, or make one think of something that's just not terrestrial, you know. So the percussive effects can remind us of earthly percussion, but you know the sounds themselves sound a little bit different. So they have that rhythmic element, but that's mostly it. And then all of those other sounds are just so beyond what we're normally going to associate with anything from this planet, and this structure is just so brilliant. It's not a conventional structure at all for a track, but you know everything still operates in cycles of eight bars. That's something that's just universal musically, and you know all of those stems are all there, all of those motifs are there, and they come in in different sequences. And there's just this logical interplay.

And I've made the observation before that it's a little bit like when you're dancing at a party and you're moving around. Back in the days when you weren't facing a stage and you were moving around the dance floor in multiple directions, and you'd come across somebody, you know, who you know, you dance a little bit, move around, and then you come back. That's kind of what it's like when these stems and these lines and motifs come in and out.

But the whole storyline is brilliant with those separate climactic points like the one with that very rhythmic harmonic element that I stated was really quite explosive and uplifting, and then there's that one phrase of those bleeps in this atonal pattern that's just it's just there once. Everything builds up to that. That's the message, and then and we move on. And those other sounds that were more familiar. It's almost like they are just helping you to integrate what it is that that whole track just built up to.

Absolutely incredible production. I'm going to put a link in the YouTube description to this side of the cassette that Jay made me, which a friend uploaded to his SoundCloud, and I've got linked on mine. And you can hear how brilliantly he mixed it, you know, as part of the story.

I played this out quite recently, just in November 2022, and I mean the place really absolutely exploded. So you know, people listening with modern ears, just listening to production, can easily pick on something in terms of how deep the sounds are, how strong the kick is, all of this sort of stuff. You know, all of you're listening on a big system, none of that's really a concern. What you're hearing is the musical content, the energetic content, and the you're having the experience of having this really insightful, inspired, creative music by people who are really excited to be in this scene.

Siochi and Nick had been going to parties that were DJed by Kudo in Tokyo, particularly at the club Yellow, and Kudo was really like the master, and you know he was just on a whole other plane. I've met him and heard him, and he was just, you know, he was he was a real inspiration to a lot of people, and I think you know anybody who had that experience as dancers and then got into production. I think there's especially in the early years we hear a lot of that excitement and that fire. And this track for me captures a lot of it. Really captures the essence of that magical first year that I was in the scene, '94 to '95.

So hope you enjoyed this. I am going to sign off here and then put the whole track on complete so that you can listen to it without any blah blah over it. So thanks again for tuning in, Mark A.K.A. DJ Solitaire here. Happy to share with you now again the full Indigo Remix by Prana.
