Artist: Taiyo (Prana)
Song: Aquaspace
Year: 1994

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 20 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present track from the Goa trance psychedelic dance movement of the 1990s, and I'm still working up in sequence from the 94-95 season. We will soon be moving on to more of the 95, 96 season, but there's still a few tracks from this period that I really wanted to cover.

I know it's going to there's always going to be something left out, but this one I could not ignore because it was one of the opening tracks in that amazing mixtape that Jay, the American DJ who was running the Odyssey parties in Tokyo, that formed part of my, you know, major part of my formation, as they would say in some European languages, you know, my training, uh, in my first years in the scene, and that track is Aquaspace by Prana, who's known as Taiyo, on this Step 2 House EP.

Now, just like we looked at, I think the last time I spoke about Prana, and also this time, last time rather, that I mentioned Transwave with their Step 2 House EP. It's an album. I mean, come on, there's seven tracks here, so I don't know what they were expecting for an album if this is considered an EP. But there we go.

I misspoke when I did the Prana video, thinking that these Taiyo tracks were before the Prana tracks, and that's why they were using the name Taiyo. But it was actually using a different project name for the different label, and that's something that would start to happen later on with Total Eclipse, for example. The Antidote, even though that later became a Serge's solo project, was originally used by the band after they signed to Blue Room Released so that they could release on other labels, notably TIP. So Taiyo was basically just Prana releasing on Step 2 House, whereas on Inter 1, before they started releasing their own music on Tsuyoshi Suzuki's soon-to-be-founded Matsuri Productions, on Inter 1 they were known as Prana.

So all that as preamble, “Aquaspace” is an absolutely mind-blowing track. Beautiful slow pacing, 134 BPM, and just gorgeous. And Jay worked it into his opening flow magnificently.

I reached out to Nick and Tsuyoshi Suzuki, the Prana Generation One musicians from around the time that this was being done, prior to Andy Guthrie joining the project in ninety five, ninety six. After Nick went to Australia, and Nick told me something I didn't know until now, which is that this was actually a solo track that he produced. It was done in ninety four. At this point, Yoshi was starting to get more gigs, and he was away for the weekend. And this was the first time that Nick was kind of left alone in the studio that was at Tsuyoshi Suzuki's place, Tsuyoshi Suzuki and Veronica's place in Gipsy Hill in London. And he didn't really have a plan when he started the track; didn't know where he was going to go. But using the Korg Mono/Poly, got this opening watery sound, and he said everything just kind of flowed from there. And so you know, Tsuyoshi Suzuki came back from a gig, and the track was basically done. It took him a day or two. Real masterpiece.

There is a lot, as always, going on in this track. Something that I love is the organic structuring. This is something I've spoken to before. You know, there's still always the reality of eight-bar sections of how things move, but the way there's this long storyline. It's so logical, but it's not micromanaged in terms of structure. The way things come come in and go out, and familiar voices come back, but the storyline is absolutely incredible. So this is just, you know, this track is a masterpiece, and don't get to play it out often enough because how do you get to play 134 BPM, right? 130 BPM though we've heard, right? But this somehow feels almost slower than some of these 130 BPM tracks like, you know, 1000 Planets and New Moon and Some of those, you know, ones from that Dragonfly compilation. So I find that really interesting. Just what creates the feeling of momentum, and in this case, of spaciousness.

So let's get started listening to this track. It is a long one, longer than average for this time, nine minutes sixteen seconds, and nothing about it feels long. I mean, it's just that gorgeous eternity of the present moment, and just such a beautiful track. So here we go.

And that beautiful watery sound, just like some water dripping. Notice this little feature. Then the ocean starts to come in. And. That offbeat syncopation, while all this other stuff is going on, then slowly starts the sound starts winding up. This sort of stuff is absolutely just ride along once you get used to what you've been listening to, and this new thing comes in and just lifts everything. Blazy sounds. These little equation or algorithm kind of waveform language pieces sounds like a whole other musical language and more voices. On the next round, there's another little voice that's going to come in. All these inter-dimensional beings communicating. This does not sound like... Other than the water, none of this sounds like it's from this planet.

Then one of the main riffs. Three simple notes. Now. And like all these rhythmic points, kind of cool. Oh, I don't know what musical coconuts. This kind of like rubbery thing over here. There's that ascending line here. You can notice all the different layers, like, levels, in terms of the frequencies. There's that gnarly... ...and that releases and all this other stuff comes out. Bit of choral line, this one over here. All right, so now that comes back. A bit of choral line. This one over here, right? That comes back.

I'm really missing these days that kind of really spacey sound, right? Like those laser these are kind of science fiction sounds. They're kind of, you know, very earthy. Like the water sounds earthy. Maybe the chika chika stuff as well. But then everything else just is so ethereal. So I guess hence, aqua space. And just like a whole other harmonic language. I just love the consistency of some of these lines, and then these other things just interject Jack, do not show up. Kind of a cool growly sound there. I've got all these voices on all of these levels just really, really works. It's kind of almost like... It kind of sounds reversed, a bit like we had in Binary Neuronaut. It goes to that upper note again, that chorus line. Ooh, and now it comes back.

And now we can start winding down. I mean, what a masterpiece! What a journey, right? So many beautiful melodies, right? Things that are hummable, things that are fluid, right? Legato is the classical term for that, right? When something has flow and is fluid, as opposed to separated, then there's those other separated bits, right? Which can add rhythm, adds this kind of Morse code-like, almost like messaging effect. Like there's some kind of code we're listening to, which you know, it's really the sense that we had back in the day when we were first exposed to this. Definitely, a lot of people spoke to that, and I mean, it's just beautiful, and the storyline is evocative. The whole track is just brilliant.

Love to play this out sometime if the timing works. I have played it before, but you know, this was back in the '90s. Just a genius track that I think everybody needs to go back and hear again. And I'm going to give you an opportunity to do that when I sign off. I'm going to present the whole track without my talking over it, so you can really appreciate all those magnificent, magnificent, rather subtleties that Nick Taylor worked into this.

I'll just note that you know the CD did say all tracks written and produced by Tsuyoshi and Nick, except some other collaborative ones on there. You know that was often done when there were projects; they didn't necessarily say who did which one. Sometimes they were all credited for some of them back in the days. Sometimes folks who just showed up, sat on the sofa, and provided atmospheric support in some form or another, also sometimes got credited. But we know Tsuyoshi and Nick were working a lot. And what a fantastic first experience of Nick in the studio alone we have in this masterpiece track.

So I will sign off now, Mark DJ Solitare here to leave you with the masterful track Aquaspace by Prana, Taiyo.
