Artist: North Central Positronics
Song: The Great Bear
Year: 1994

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 24 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present a track that I remember from the 90s goa psychedelic dance movement, tracks that I remember from the time and that I believe are some of the best from this whole Incredible genre of music with its different subgenres and however one pronounces that French word in English. And here we are at episode 24, so that means we've been at this for six months, and I've been presenting, with the exception of the first track, in a way, all tracks that I remember from the 94-95 season. And so this episode, I'm going to use to wrap up tracks that I remember that really made a strong impression in that season.

There are, of course, other ones. Unfortunately, I know there are sometimes some violations on copyright, so certain tracks I know have been blocked automatically when I had them in DJ mixes, so I'm not able to feature them. And you know, There's so many tracks to be featuring, also from '95, '96, and onwards, and so on. So it's going to take a little while to get through a bunch of these classics.

So I thought I would wrap up with a track that I remember very, very distinctly for several reasons. It was a real favorite of Jay's. At the Odyssey parties, I remember him playing it many times, and it was one of these ones that I would go, you know, running up and say, "What's this track?" And he'd show me the vinyls, and it's not like I could really focus or see clearly in that poor lighting, and that I would remember anything afterwards. So I just remember seeing the label, actually, and but I it was it was on the mixtape that he first gave me at the end of '94 for my birthday, and that he just beautifully mixed.

And I've actually mentioned this track a little bit from when we covered Slinky Wizard's track Wizard, because in the alternate mix of that, that long desk mix, Simon worked in one of the choral riffs from this other track. And this track is North Central Positronics, the project name, The Great Bear.

Now, North Central Positronics is actually a fictional name of a company that produces robots in some Stephen King novels, and the project featured Simon Posford With Ben Kempton, who actually also worked with him on the track LSD, the original version at least, and a fellow called Factor E, whose first name was Tim, if my memory serves correctly. Simon couldn't remember his last name, and a guy who moved on from the scene and became an estate agent, as Simon said.

And this track would have been produced on at Simon's home studio in Battersea. He said around 93, 94, but we know that that Wizard Desk Mix was made in late 93. It's got the same riff, so it's probably from around the same time.

Now I was thinking of this track. You know, I was thinking that I was going to move on to you know the 94 95 season already after episode 23 and then I came across this card when it was a friend was visiting recently and it was looking at Jay's top 10 and this was in here and then I realized you know this track had such an influence on me I mean it was just always one of my favorites so I needed to feature this one and in fact Getting my hand on this track, like on an actual copy, took five years.

So I first heard this in '94, as I said, and then I didn't get a copy of it until late '99, and it's a bit of a fun story. So Jay had left Japan and left his records with Chris Case, who was he was an old London hippie fellow in the 1960s, and was a great ambient DJ, really eclectic musical taste, and knows a lot about classical music. So he and I talk a lot about that kind of thing too.

And I knew I wanted this track. And when I was leaving Japan for the last time from living there in '99, late in July '99, before going off to Europe and going to Solipse, I was like, I was on a mission. I was like, I need to get this track, but I didn't know what it was. I didn't know what it was called. So I went over to Chris's place, and he lived like two hours out in the countryside by train. And we had a day there, and I was just put on one record after another, putting it, putting the needle on the record, and checking to see if I could find this thing. And like less than half an hour before I had to leave and catch the train back, I heard it, and I was like, "This is it! This is it!" And you know, put the needle on the record with the DAT player there, and recorded it. And I was thrilled to actually have it.

Now I tried seeing if Simon had a DAT that was usable, and unfortunately, the only copy that I could find in his collection was seriously distorted. And so, when I managed to get this finally released on, there we go, on this Mind Rewind Charity compilation where the profits went to an orphanage in Goa. We had to use a vinyl rip, and that's what we're going to listen to today.

So, you know, this track ticks off a lot of boxes in terms of what it is that I love in this whole scene. It's got a variety of moods. It's got really hummable, singable riffs, and they all play together beautifully. You know, they can all be layered there, and it's just gorgeous—the interplay between the voices—and really, the melodies are really beautiful. They're beautiful, singable, and I think the storyline as well is marvelous.

Simon is a little less enthused, and when I shared this on Facebook, you can see the comment here that he wrote about his thoughts on the track. And I respectfully disagree. I think this is a marvelous, marvelous track.

So let's give this a listen, shall we? Just line it up here, and here we go.

Beautiful, Mysterious kind of undulating start. Some more mystical sounds in there, just murmuring, choral voices, and some other stuff interplaying with that. Then something unexpectedly dark. The the notes, right, melodically. This is beautiful harmonically. How it's all interplaying, and just the really the alchemy. Some of it sounds, you know, nice and beautiful, and there's also this sort of gnarly dark side to it, which is interesting. How those moods interplay.

The drum roll in. And the drum roll in. Notice the rhythm. And the rhythm to the percussion, right? The rhythm's not just on the beat. Three bars or something. Beautiful riff. Just a really simple pattern. Just keeps repeating. Really has a great hook.

More clap, clap-like things again, like a variety of percussive elements. So then, this really catchy riff is going to start moving into another catchy one, which has another rhythm harmonically, the whole shaping of it, and it's almost like a counterpoint to the other one, right? So that one was making its statement, and then Oh, this one's kind of repeating its answer.

And then, just over here, it's going to break away. Those gorgeous voices in that alternate “Wizard” mix. Just listen to those notes. That just opens up. And that just opens up, and then this whole new development here, and then listen to how those voices are playing together, it's gorgeous, I mean, perfect sunrise track when it's Perfect sunrise track, wouldn't you say?

And then this this comes in. Really reminds me of Chris de Burgh's “A Spaceman Came Travelling”. Go get that a listen. There's a lot of common shaping to the melodic subjects and the mood. And this riff.

Then this riff comes back. The percussion sort of pick drops away a little bit, a little Transition, catch your breath a little. Just so seamless, isn't it? I mean, you know, these are again, they're stems riffs that we've heard before, and they just come in so naturally from one to the other. They all fit together just like a glove.

Ironic, I should say that, because smell the glove was one of the tracks on the on this vinyl. Wow, there's that slightly dark flavor that comes in. And that beautiful undulating with those beautiful choral voices, it's just gonna fade away.

This beautiful pattern, right? This is where again some beautiful mixing can happen in these moments, right? Where it's just like that, as I mentioned before, this cloud of energy that's leaving the dance floor, another one comes in. I mean, wow! Such a beautiful track.

Again, that's one of the things that really struck me when I first heard this music. Right, it was fun, playful, otherworldly. But then there's also this beauty, like you could actually hum and sing. This electronic dance music didn't have to be abrasive or harsh. Sometimes those qualities work, right, within context. But just a gorgeous , gorgeous track, a real sort of secret, secret Simon Posford track, which again, according to his comment on my post, probably like to keep it secret.

But I just think a gorgeous one came out on you know this really, you know, unusual non goa Perhaps I don't know label Intelligence Records, and there we go. I mean, I just think it' gorgeous, gorgeous track. One Jay used to play all the time, as we've seen in his top ten for 1994, and I remember him playing it in '95 as well as one did. And it's just a classic, and I'm glad that at least it became available again on this one, and there we go.

Now, I'm not saying I'm never going to sort of go back and present any tracks from the '94 to '95 season. There are several that I've missed. I just really want us to start, you know, get things moving along. And I figured that perhaps, you know, six months and 24 tracks might be a good little organizing principle for us to then Move on to what's next.

Alrighty, so I am going to sign off here and then leave you with the entire track, "The Great Bear" by North Central Positronics.
