Artist: Space Tribe
Song: The Great Spirit (original mix)
Year: 2014

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 25 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present tracks from the heyday of the Goa trance psychedelic electronic dance music movement, tracks that I have recollections of from back in the 90s when it was at events in Japan, London, and elsewhere, and as well as some tracks that I've possibly come across since. But focusing on music produced in the 90s, the first 24 episodes have largely focused on tracks that I first encountered in the 94-95 season, even though in some cases I only got my grubby little hands on them later. This is now the first episode in tracks that I first came across in the '95-'96 season, and we're starting with one that relates to an event that is one of certainly one of the most memorable ones.

And this is when Olli Wisdom from Space Tribe, whose first party that I went to in October '94 is the one that really blasted me into this whole other dimension. When he played a year later, almost to the day, at a full moon party overlooking Mount Fuji, and that was October ninth. It was a Monday night because it was a holiday, actually, on the Monday or the Tuesday, and look at this fancy flyer. Isn't it great? I mean, nowadays, you know, there's a lot of energy put into very fancy flyers. You always see DJs' photos on them. You know, nice black and white photocopy, very simple, and it's kind of neat how things had to happen back then. Remember, pre-internet, right? So in this case, I remember we had to go to a club the week and the days before, the Wednesday before, at a certain time to buy your ticket in advance and to find the location information. And I remember taking the train and then we were bussed towards to this field that was overlooking Mount Fuji.

So the track is one that was produced by Olli Wisdom, and in fact I ended up having a role to play in the first release of the track about 20 years later. So this is the original mix of The Great Spirit by Space Tribe. When Olli Wisdom's first album came out in was it January '97? It was around then, late '96 or early '97. There was a desk mix, so sort of a longer mix of this, and it was said it was the hallucinogenic mix. Olli Wisdom told me that when he was producing this track at the Butterfly Studios in the upstairs studio, which is the smaller one, this was the first track he was making on his own after having produced the four tracks that we know of that he did with Simon Posford beforehand, and Simon wandered in because he was often there and spontaneously did a desk mix, despite not having heard really you know the whole track. So back then, after that album was released in '97, and I remember playing some of it for Simon because it said "hallucinogenic remix." It didn't say "Hallucinogen mix." So I wanted to know if it was Hallucinogen or if this was just some sort of little play on words that Olli Wisdom was doing. And Simon said he had no recollection of it. But years later, Olli Wisdom told me, "Oh no, Simon did do that one." So there we go.

But the original mix. Now this is a whole story. So this was not a track that I would have recognized at this time because it wasn't released. And the way that I know that Olli Wisdom played this is a little while after the event, I met someone who had recorded part of the party, the audio of it, on a mini disc player. And so I got a copy of that, copied it onto DAT, and then I heard this track on it, and I was really curious what it was. And then when I got the Space Tribe CD, I was like, "Cool, it's that," but it's a different mix. So then, in '97 as well, when I was living in London, I used to trade, you know, tracks on DAT with a few different folks, and this French guy came over to my place with some, and you know it was always tough in terms of you know what you trade for what because it was seen as you know some tracks have a bit more status than others, and this guy had some really great music, and he had this track, Space Tribe, The Great Spirit, but his DAT was glitching, so we listened to it once or twice, and there was always like some kind of metallic tape noise. But he let me copy it, and I think that's why he let me copy it because it was, you know, it was a great track, but I couldn't really play it out because there was a glitch. So we lined up the DAT decks, I put it on, was recording it, and it played through without a glitch. And his face was like didn't exactly stop me from taking it when he'd offered it, but yeah, I got the glitchless track, and then of course I played it out at pretty much every event for a few years.

It was only released for the first time in 2014 on the first DAT Records compilation, one of the Analog series, “Analog Dreams”, and I mean this is one that I'd always dreamed of releasing. I was surprised the original mix wasn't released, and it's a fantastic track. Olli Wisdom told me it the vocal sample it's his then wife Jade singing. She had a great voice. There's some animal noises, sounds like dolphins or whales, and there's a spoken sample from a Hollywood B movie. He was really into choosing spoken samples from really obscure movies that people wouldn't recognize. And there's just a great structure and great storytelling in this fantastic track. And you know, for me, because I know, even though I didn't recognize it at the time that it was being played, because I know it was at that event. It has a special hook for me.

This was only the second time that I heard Olli Wisdom play. I actually went up and greeted him and said hello, and you know, of course, completely starstruck. That was about all I could do. He was that the DJ booth was a teepee. That he would come out and he would come out and dance, you know, sort of come out and yeah, the TP and sort of dance a little bit with folks that were around there and go back in. And that was something that you know people were very surprised when I did that. I've always done that since seeing that, and you know when I did that at ZNA in 2015, in particular, people really commented on how you know unusual that was. Why not? You know when it's a family style party and there's the capacity to do that, they can Makes sense, but but I digress.

This gorgeous track is really absolutely astounding, and let's have a listen. And then at the end, of course, I'll present the whole track without my talking over it.

So cool vocal sample. Notice the rhythm, that bass, this rubbery sound. Really, just fascinating textures in her music. Very mystical. And this undulating energy here. You can hear it going back and forth between the left and right. Really, the tension just builds. Everything sounds like voices right now. Thank you. Some flange-like effects going on here, and a little percussive stuff here, so no clear melody or anything like that. Really, I'll just turn on it. And now... And now, it's just a simple pattern that repeats slightly, you know, with some slightly different voicing. Just extra speed. And then the spray clear. And then this break here, it's probably dolphins or whales, but you know, it sounds like anything in outer space and the tension here and this pattern. A good old up-and-down figuration that's so common at the time. I really just like waves and configurations of energy. And then this break. Some random, wild electronic stuff, and then this kind of gnarly voice here, coming down. This keeps deepening, right? A really meandering journey, this one. And then this bleepy voice comes back. Back really sounds like an alien voice doesn't it and this great big break here and then... What's that sliding down? Again, more just really random sounds. Now comes the Hollywood B-movie sound, which really makes you think about ancient civilizations having used music and sound is grueling. What a nice solid kick. And a bass line. No overt melody, right? Nothing really singable. Everything's just more implied and very floaty. And then this beautiful voice here. Very apocryphal. And then here, that more of that up and down, just a really sort of rhythmic pattern that those two phases. And leading into the final section, there's the affirmational atmosphere to that bass line. Puts on a bit more of a affirmational, celebratory kind of atmosphere. And this sounds like a bit of a clarion call coming in here. And those messages were either being out or just being being down to us. Now that it's being beamed down to us, now things start to wrap up. That's the bend that we cut up and down. We're going to work through the patterns. Voice. Pretty magical track.

I mean, I have no idea why Olli Wisdom didn't release that one and instead released the desk mix, you know, which is certainly a fine version, but it doesn't have the drama and I think the tension. I think it's a lot floatier, and this one has its floaty quality to it too. Really meandering storyline, but still with a greater sense of structure, I think. And it's like these different vignettes at different times. And as I said, there's no real tune per se in the sense that you're going to hum this riff, but it's still melodic. It's still beautiful. Has lots of different catchy elements and has a lot of power. Has an uplifting quality as well as an introspective one, slightly dark but also celebratory. There was a lot of mood shifts and combinations in the tracks back then that I think made a lot of them very, very special.

And this one, for me, Again, just by virtue of it having been at that event, which is really memorable, and then how I, you know, the beautifully synchronistic way that I got my hands on it, that magically did not glitch. Great spirit sort of intervened over there while I was making my copy, and that, you know, some 19 years after the track was produced, I was able to get it Published for the first time, Olli Wisdom very graciously agreed to that. It's a really special track, so it's not the first track that I recognize per se from that the beginning of that '95-'96 season. I'm I'm talking academic years, right? For me, it's like September. I went back to Japan, and you know, so that whole season for me is kind of more like a school year. I it really did feel like it was in school when it was the real university. Well, it was on the dance floor hearing all these great DJs. So, so there we go. We're into the swing of things in that second 95, 96 season, my second year in the scene, as I was starting to recognize more and more of the music and get Deeper and deeper into this musical realm.

So I will be back in a week with another track. In the meantime, I will sign off here, Mark DJ Solitare, and I'm going to leave you now with the complete, unfiltered, original mix of Space Tribe's The Great Spirit. Thanks for watching!
