Artist: Koxbox
Song: Loads of Flow (Molecular Mix)
Year: 1995

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 27 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series devoted to the best tracks of the 90s, in my opinion, in the Goa trance psychedelic dance movement, tracks that I have recollections of hearing back then in the 90s, for the most part, or at least so far.

And for this episode, I am featuring a track from an album that was already in the series that I first got in the '94-'95 season. I'm counting the seasons like scholastic years since my exposure to the scene started in September '94. And the reason is, first of all, this entire album was so great that it was very hard for me to choose one track from it, but also because I clearly have a recollection of hearing this track at the September Autumn Equinox party that was put on by the Equinox Party Organization.

This took place in Chichibu, a sort of a district, sort of far outside of Tokyo, a couple of hours away by train, and then we were bused into this location. This is the party I actually spoke about at least once before in the very first episode in this whole series. It was an absolutely incredible event where Kuni played the whole night, about ten hours, not just night, night, well into the morning. Really, really epic, and I clearly remember this track being played quite early on in his set.

And I remember because I was very familiar with it, I was very happy having heard it on this absolutely fantastic album for several months. And I remember there was a spoken sample in this track, and I was dancing with a friend on the dance floor, and I knew when the sample was coming. And you know, the music stops. There's a spoken words, and I whispered it, whispered the phrase in my friend's ear at the same time it came on the sound system, gave her a bit of a shock. Apparently, took her a little while to recover from that. But there we go.

Anyway, so it's a fantastic track. It is called Loads of Flow. It's the Molecular Mix. Not that I've heard another mix of this track, and it was on Koxbox's brilliant album on Harthouse Forever After. It's the last track.

Now Koxbox is, you know, the three musicians of Frank Madsen, Peter Frellesen, a.k.a. Peter Candy, and Ian Ion. But that this track was also produced with this project whose name I could never pronounce properly, Cwithe, it's like letter C, the word with and E at the end of it. They had an album that came out on on Blue Room a few years later, and I know Jens Waldebäck, great musician, was one half of that project and Koxbox did a number of tracks with Jens Waldebäck, so I'm not sure if both Jens Waldebäck and Antony Koppenaal, who were part of this unpronounceable project name, were were involved in this particular track, or if it was just Jens Waldebäck. But regardless, phenomenal track, lots to admire as there always is with these Coxbox productions.

It's just really a real favorite of mine for several, several reasons, and so I'm looking forward to sharing it with you. So I remember, as I said, Kuni played this quite early on at that party. The party started quite late, just to give you a little background to that particular event. It started later than expected, And Kuni started off with some ambient, and it turned into more and more ambient. And it turned out that it was the entire “Mystical Experiences” that, so you know, was a CD that he played the whole thing as opening. And people were getting a little bit antsy for the dance music to start because it was getting quite late. I think after midnight at this point.

And I remember somebody yelling, "Oi, I've got some Juno Reactor in the car if you need some dance music," and eventually the dance music started. And among the first tracks I remember, there was “Quadsep” by Voodoo People, which I featured, and this track. And in fact, those two tracks mixed together beautifully, and I've done that a couple of times.

And because of that sample, because of that whole situation, you know, of me whispering into my friend's ear. Remember very clearly in you know in the forest under the stars and hearing this incredible music, you know, and you know the party finally taking off and this being one of the first ones. It just it it's forever linked with that particular event for me.

So how about we give this track a listen? Beautiful, Loads of Flow by Koxbox, the Molecular Mix again. I haven't heard another mix, but that's what it's called. Loads of Flow by Koxbox. Here we go.

So it starts off pretty much like you know a lot of techno and so on, right? Just with a kick, no intro, as would normally be the case in a lot of Goa. Notice the bassline. These kind of baby sounds. That reminds me actually of some secret beat or whatever kind of music. Listen. You can see the beat, or whatever you want to call the music. Listen to the... See the modulations going on in the bassline. And then... Beautiful pattern. So, pitched, but no tone with it, right? So just rhythmic and tonal. And pitched, but... Really adds texture and dimension.

And then this other line here, again like a call and answer, and then, slide, and it's almost like this, again an alien voice, just saying one note, except for that slide, and then this rhythmic element coming in here. A lot going on here already. Very clear, very transparent. And that one note point start. There was often in a lot of there was a lot of German music where you'd often get a chorus or a voice just saying one note like that, just kind of like a simple statement of fact. It steps back and then it comes back. Just an amazing, super hypnotic.

Have some new information here. Again, a bit of a call and answer going on there. All of that. I mean, this is just going in all directions, right, it's going up and down, front to back, and it's just really spinning around, and stuff that's rhythmic, that's tonal, that's and then this beautiful spoken sample. And then this beautiful spoken sample. Welcome to my world.

This structure of these tracks is so brilliant. It's not boxy at all, but very clear progressions in eight-bar sections. I love the frequency. The stuff that's going down. I love that voice. It's kind of sheet metal. So much happening. We don't have nearly enough sci-fi sounds like that going on nowadays. This is really outer space music. It's not that soft voice.

And there's going to be a counterpoint to that coming in, on the next round of 8. There we go. Thanks for watching! Now, that's going to vary somewhat here, and he goes back to the original, and that's... And then just on this last one here, drum buildup. All those snaps and whooshes and stuff, Morse code, beautiful harmonies, some hypnotic repetition. I love that pitch slide. I love that pitch slide. I love that pitch slide. I love that pitch slide.

I'm sure this will happen at some time. So you've got this kind of singing, synthetically, in a very beautiful, inquisitive way. Let's try to stay right down. Again, this track a little bit more like you know more techno stuff. The kit keeps going to the end also under the radar for "Goa" quote unquote stuff. Absolute magic. I mean, you know, really every track on this is magic.

But what another world? Welcome to my world. What a great sampling! Certainly was when I whispered it to my friends ear at that party. Yeah, really. I mean, it captures the atmosphere of really these tracks. I mean, great track to play, you know, early on in a party, if you think about that, you know, setting the energy of you know local people into this particular world, whichever world or worlds that might be, just magical music from Koxbox and Friends, an all-time classic.

This is one of the. I mean, there's several tracks on here that I've played out, but this is one of the ones I regularly go back to, too, and much easier to mix when it's not on DAT. I've featured it in a couple of flows recently. I'll include one in the comments in the description on YouTube. But absolute masterpiece again. The entire album really needs to be heard over and over again. And what a great track to close that album.

So I will sign off here and leave the whole track without commentary, so that you can enjoy it more fully and appreciate all this incredible layering and the musical content of this fantastic track, the Molecular Mix of Loads of Flow by Coxbox. Welcome to my world. Thanks for watching!
