Artist: The Green Nuns of the Revolution
Song: Ring of Fire
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 28 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I present in each episode one of the tracks that I consider to be among the best that were produced in the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement scene. And Today is the first time, finally, featuring this fantastic project. We're into the '95-'96 season at this point, and although I might have encountered one of their tracks earlier on, this is, I think, one of the most memorable ones. One that I do have memories of from then, and also, you know, in early 96 plus subsequent years, of course, and one that's always in my playlist. And this is "Ring of Fire" by The Green Nuns of the Revolution.

Now, initially, there were two members of Green Nuns, which is what we'll call it for short: Matt Caldric and Dick Trevor. They would later be joined by Neil Crowley, and this track "Ring of Fire" is from their first Flying Rhino single that was released in January or February '96. It was called the Afterburner EP, and there's a little bit of schoolboy humor here. Side A was the Saturday Night side, I believe it was called. Yeah, Saturday Night Side. Two vindalooes and an onion bhaji, some spicy Indian food, and the B side was Sunday morning, Ring of Fire. So if you consider the theme of what might happen the next day after eating spicy Indian food and so on, you can sort of do the math and figure out what they were pointing to.

But this track, Ring of Fire, is really one of the most uplifting, brilliantly constructed and conceived, you know, in terms of content creations that that they produced certainly. And Matt told me that it's his favorite Green Nuns track, and it's probably my favorite one as well. First one they did, by the way, was conflict, and there's a whole story behind that one that I might eventually get to if I feature that one. But this is the one that really gets me going.

So Matt shared some brilliant insights about this track and their project with me. So thanks so much for that, Matt. And one of the phrases that he used really struck me, and it it ties in a lot with a lot of what I've been talking about, and that's the luxury of limitation. This is a brilliant concept that we need to explore because nowadays it's very interesting that everybody's got all these sounds that are available. The technology is amazing; can do absolutely anything. You can do all these so easy to do samples and all this kind of stuff. And ironically, everybody kind of sounds the same. Whereas back then, people didn't have huge studios with absolutely everything. Everybody had very individual sort of combinations of equipment, and everybody sounded different. You know, the the limitation of what equipment they had was a luxury in a way, because you know, necessity is the mother of all invention, and so they had to get inventive, and they worked with what they had, and created something.

Now, just a little sidebar, you know, I would say that for me, learning how to DJ on that, there was a luxury of limitation there, because I had to think creatively with how I could put tracks together. Whereas if I learned on another technology, that might not be the case, and so now, with that, I can work differently, mixing with more advanced technology. So there really is something to this luxury of limitation. I think it's a it was beautiful combination, Matt. I'm going to be using that a lot, so thank you. But it really helps highlight, I think, some of the ingenuity and creativity that went into the music making at the time.

And so Matt told me that you know they would rehearse before doing the recordings, and the recordings then was not again what the technology allows for now, which is you know you get everything completely prearranged, including all the effects and everything. Then you hit a button and the file renders, not in real time, which is what was happening back then. The whole track that you're listening to was being worked in real time as the recording was being made, so they would be sweeping and doing all kinds of effects, a lot of knob twiddling, and that went into the recording. So each take that they did, and they would sometimes do five or ten takes to get the right one, and then listen and choose the best one. Occasionally, maybe edit pieces from different ones together. It was a live performance, so you're listening when you're listening to the music from those tracks. You're listening to something that second by second the artist was actually doing something at the time.

And so, isn't it interesting that really creates this level? I think of engagement with those of us who are listening now. So you know, I think this all ties in absolutely, with you know what was their intent, what was their you know their excitement, their engagement, their creativity, their curiosity. This is all stuff I've talked about before, and so now you know I think we're starting to really get into you know what some of that. Why was this music so great? And let's also just pay attention to the fact that the music was great because the music was also great. There were a lot of elements that they were bringing in.

One of the things that Matt said about this track also, is that you know this it's this tracks it stays with the repetition, so there is the repetition, and then there's also that that's changing. And this is something I've referred to before, you know that we when you have those things that are changing, you know what stays the same stands out, and they both coexist. So we have simultaneously the change and the unchanging. So and this can really just trans you out and trans you in, really quite beautifully.

Let me just see if there's any other notes here that I wanted to share. The name of the project, Green Nuns of the Revolution, combination of words that most people would not have expected. Came when they didn't expect it when they were sitting around Dick's place in Fulham, which is where this was produced. He had a home studio, and they were watching a TV documentary about Libya's Colonel Kadhafi's all-female bodyguard squad, who were called Green Nuns of the Revolution. They just heard this, you know, combination of words and looked at each other, and Matt said possibly said something like band name, you know, or something along those lines, and nothing political, just like humorous. Like again, who to thunk it? So, so there we go.

So, Ring of Fire, I think one of the most amazing tracks as well. Just tying in what I mentioned earlier about when I first heard this, Dominic Lam came to Tokyo in early 1996 to play at one of Jay and Maori's Odyssey parties. It was held in that big cavernous Club Spiral in Roppongi with absolutely huge vaulted ceiling, it was just massive. And this was the first track he played. I remember distinctly these effects, and it is what he was playing off a vinyl. This would have been, you know, just a test pressing because it was just about to come out. And I mean, the effect there's there's so much going on musically here, that is really brilliant.

So, why don't we get started and get this beautiful track on "Ring of Fire" by The Green Nuns of the Revolution. Beautiful, like glass, like chime, like sort of sounds with those whoosh noises. And listen to the rhythm, and also the slight slide that's in that baseline. It's a little bit more compression and kick, and all those effects going on. So here are those sweeps. Matt did say that they would rehearse before recording, so they knew exactly how long to do what effects. This again, just this repetition. While some things are changing, and there's just this beautiful, hypnotic, melodic, harmonic groove. Listen how clear the instrumentation is, right? So you can hear that bass line with that pattern up, and some laser thunderbolts. A little bit of percussion while it builds, while the main kick is out. Sort of thought maybe it was gonna break there, and it didn't. And then here, and really hypnotic. And just kind of radio noise, alien voice, kind of things. You know, all of their music is so playful that it still has that otherworldly sound. Just that simple pattern, sort of that nice kind of gnarly, throaty kind of sound. Upper register over there. All, you know, again, all those layers, all those sonic layers, you know, sort of in terms of high and low on the keyboard. And then this voice does it. Again, another repeated pattern. Just, just really drives it. So good. Having We have another higher frequency again, so we've got all those frequency levels represented like we were speaking to. It's going to break through in the next cycle of 8 bars, I think. Now it goes up, I think it's one octave, creates a bit of a call-and-answer effect, got some bongo rhythm sort of stuff going on here, while that loop is getting a little bit louder, and then... And then, this kind of insistent celebratory off the pens in the air kind of thing going on. Again, this kind of, you know, one note utterance. Combined with all the other sounds. So I've got the rhythm, as well as the pattern of notes. And that extra little exclamation going on there. And then a really key turning point coming in here. This is like pretty non-special, right, this is kind of what they're known for, and just like driving, and they just think things can't get any higher, and they keep getting higher. Always pushing the button. And just pull that back just a little bit so they can catch their breath slightly before before the insanity resumes. How bad. Really triumphant, isn't it? Ooh, I love how that comes in on the fire register. And then we have a break with one of the most amazing samples ever chosen, from a Ren and Stimpy cartoon. I mean, celebratory, just this all that upper level I mean just absolutely blows the lid off every party it's almost it's almost like if you consider this as like kind of cross-hatching kind of like patterning I don't know it's like really beautifully stitched together yeah, beautiful fabric. I love fabric. I love that rush. Nice little pressure. Nice straightening pattern. It's really this triumphant kind of we are here, celebrating kind of thing, you know? Bring them special grip. I love the extra little bongo kind of percussive sound in the background. This starts to come down, and then up to the discussion of the DJ how much they're going to mix into something else, or how much the other people breathe. You can hear the noise wow.

As an eight-minute track, I mean, there is a whole lot going on there, as we could hear, with the high energy relentlessness, but not so relentless in the sense that you know they pull back a little bit and then they keep going, and you constantly think things can't get higher and then they do. But it's still brilliantly structured to allow you know sort of things will pull back just slightly and then go wild.

So, so as I said, they would often do you know five or ten mixes, and they would sometimes use different mixes in live sets, you know. And back then, sometimes, you know, of course, they would take equipment for live sets and do things live. But sometimes they had pre-recorded versions as well that were different, so you could hear some different takes, but still in studio sound quality.

And around 2014, on the first Stat Records compilation, we put out a an extended mix of this track, which is the one that I tend to play because there's a whole other section at that key. What I mentioned was a key turning point in the track, where you know the Greenland special, as I'm dubbing it now, where that sort of comes in. And there's a whole other section of musical content that comes in. Unfortunately, for some reason, a lot of folks who were writing comments and reviews online said, "Oh, there's nothing different about this version of the track. It's just a longer intro." Sorry, guys, you're completely off the mark here. There's a whole other minute of musical content that is completely not present in the original released mix. You know, in a 10-minute mix wouldn't have been. You know, on average, that's not what came out on vinyl with Techno Symphony and some others. That's not entirely true, but imagine 10 minutes of this kind of stuff. Well, I mean, of course it works. I played it at CNA in 2022 and definitely blew the lid off the party, or at least in that set, it was something else.

So I just want to play that little section of that one minute of musical content. It's just sort of leading into what I said was that key turning point. And then there's this whole other section that's got just having some fantastic content, but it's just you know, it's hard for me to play the shorter version of this track because I just love this extra level of insanity. So let's just give this little section a listen. Let's just give this this actually this. And just these wild whooshes, you know, you hear that bassline still really clearly. So there's those bongos as well that you hear more clearly against this sort of downward spiral. And now it's in a reverse direction. This keeps climbing, and then this is where the original track was. That was what it led into.

So I mean, you know, structurally it works absolutely brilliantly. You know, it came in at that turning point and just added something else, and then there's that other piece. So I I just think it's it's an absolute masterpiece. I mean, the whole track is all the content's great. It's wonderful to be able to hear some extra juicy stuff in there, and what a monster track! Ring of Fire by Green Nuns of the Revolution.

I will sign off here, and I'll leave you with the uninterrupted by me, complete commercial vinyl version of Ring of Fire as it appeared in early '96 on the Afterburner EP.
