Artist: Sheyba
Song: Into The 4th Dimension
Year: 1995

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 29 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of the tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement, tracks that I remember from back then or came to know retroactively.

And Today we're still in the '95-'96 season, and this is a track that I know Olli Wisdom played at that Fuji Full Moon Party in October '95, and it appears that Kuni might have played that at that party a few weeks earlier for the Autumn Equinox, because there's audio recording on an open mic, sort of, you know, recording the air near the speakers of both parties, not the entire thing, but just a little excerpt. I've got 30 minutes of Kuni and about 45 minutes of Olli Wisdom playing there, and this track is in both of them, and it's a doozy.

It's a really brilliant in production, and it is into the fourth dimension by Sheyba, or however you want to pronounce it, or spell it actually, because the spelling is in fact incorrect. So the two musicians in this project are Kristian Thinning Andersen and Jean Borelli. Christian having been the producer of Elysium and Jean Borelli, who was a DJ and had the amazing project name solo project Orion, as well as other collaborations, including this one.

And this track was produced in 1995 in Kristian's studio outside of Copenhagen. He had just gotten the Roland Juno-106, which he said that has a recognizable, that's recognizable sound in the sequence filter melody, and they first played it out when Borelli had DJed at his own party in Copenhagen, had a great response, and then a month later, James Monro and George Barker were in Copenhagen for a party, and at the after party they heard it and were like, "We're signing this, along with 'Ancient Lands,' which was a solo track that they released under Sheyba, and that's actually ties in with the name. So the actual name it should be spelled S H E B A, I believe, and it's an ancient land. So it's sort of a there's a few different spellings for this place, and they just found it in dictionary, but it was spelt in that particular dictionary as it is on the record. S h e y b a, and you'll notice that the name is C. Andersen because Kristian had a pretty tight contract that didn't allow him to produce anything on another label, so he just kind of changed the Kristian Andersen to C. Andersen or another Christian Anderson with a non-Danish spelling.

So that's that, and this track is a doozy. It's a long one. I was just saying last week about you know ten-minute tracks not being too common. They weren't, but here you got one, and beautiful, slow, hypnotic, groovy, tribal. Checks off a lot of boxes, and it's really got a fantastic hypnotic feel, wonderful spoken sample, which neither of us could track down actually exactly who is saying it. But it will be clear as I'll point out what kind of person is saying it. And yeah, I just think this is a really fantastic production. Which if it made it to CD, it was only on a, it would have been on sort of an unofficial compilation. It wasn't on a Flying Rhino compilation, so this one kind of went under the radar, I think, for a lot of folks. But again, I know that I know that Kuni played it, suspect at that party, but I wouldn't have recognized it because it would have been brand new. And I know that Olli Wisdom played it again because of that recording. So I think we should listen to into it.

So here we go into the fourth dimension by Sheyba. Beautiful, mystical opening. Just sort of like setting the atmosphere. Bright, spacey sound. This kind of like pulsating, kind of you know sound waves of the of the universe. So again, all of this kind of undulating like sound. We totally need more of these kinds of sounds in the music now, don't we? And then this bass line. Just listen to how simple and clear and beautiful this is. We've got the rhythm, got that harmonic oscillation. This really nice oscillating effect. Super groovy. Just an extra little. Love that kind of like radio noise and then just super mysterious, like you're floating in space, and just have this kind of celestial chorus kind of voice. Just starts sneaking in here. The way this is coming in makes it sounds to me like a live mix, right? Where sort of everything would be sequenced, and then as the volume starts getting louder, and listen to the beautiful key change, and then that drum thing, and then the previous voice pulls back.

When I was in space, the most profound experience was to see this little planet from that distance and that bounce so that was obviously an astronaut speaking but we haven't been able to find who that was listen to this fantastic bouncy melody I mean again everything's really clear everything plays beautifully simultaneously the voicing, you know, it hits all the different registers and that electronic sound. Then we've got our major, minor stuff going on in terms of the intervals that we're playing with. It is brilliant. Those voices. Those voices. Ooh, expecting something there. Kind of the anticipation is always there. There it is. And then simultaneously with that chorus, and then that upper register coming in.

So what's really interesting here is the combination of attack. We'd say you have like some bouncy stuff, and very detached stuff, which in classical you say staccato, and then you have that lyrical, fluid legato. So there's that real contrast of textures with that. And then that break. Listen to how they do breaks. Producers now, this is how you do a break, and then the syncopation. Notice how the relationship with the kick changes the feeling of that riff. I love that. Very tribal sounding, like with that. And then you have those really spacey sounds that come in like that. Really sounds like tribal people sort of connecting to the stars and communicating with whatever's out there. It's just simple stuff, isn't it? And that's all you need to try and set... but different voices coming in. Beautiful, we've got a fluid legato, where we have that bounce. It's a very interesting combination of sounds. I love the way that chorus kind of shifts. Ah, just a wonderful spoken sample. I love the way those drum rolls just come in occasionally, but it's sort of not. The pacing here is just great. It's really like spacious when you're in space. A little distortion there, a little extra edge. So that's. Ooh, that's lower now. That voice is voiced differently now. A little bit more throat. More chest, it's the guttural.

You know, you when you have something that's this slow—not as that slow—but the way it builds up, you know, things can really explode. More so than when it's like machine gun speed. It just really the tension builds up in this whole other way when you work really harmonically and structurally like that. So you can really see dance floors going off to this. It's so interesting, is it? Because it's got this bouncy, you know, feel good kind of quality to it. There's got that minor sort of interval that gives it a little bit more of a broody feeling, and then that bouncy stuff, the lyrical stuff. Amazing combinations. More tribal voices along with that spacey stuff. Let's see what we've got there. Just gonna drift off. Back to that little taste of those oscillations.

Wow, quite a journey, huh? Yeah, really, to space and back. I just love that combination of you know really tribal, earthy, grounded. You know the slowness and that kind of you know the voices and that guttural kind of quality to it, and that sort of you know has that very much like you know people dancing outside at night under the stars and the full moon while being able to see the stars. You know, and that reference to being in space and looking down at the earth from the astronaut is just an amazing sort of both here and there kind of combination. And you know, that was really the feeling I had. You know, it was the second outdoor party I went to when I when I went to Kuni. You know, Kuni playing at that Autumn Equinox party in September '95, where I gather, you know, it seems like he played this. I don't have a date for that audio, but just doing the math with the tracks, it makes sense that that was really the feeling I had when it was in that forest clearing, and you could see the stars, and it just felt like, you know, we've been doing this for thousands of years. And hearing it, especially with modern music, it just ties in that whole timelessness. You know, we have the sounds of the future coming to us here, and they're bridging with. Timelessness, you know, to be at the sounds of the future coming to us here, and they're bridging with the ancient sounds of the past.

So, so there we go. I think a pretty amazing track. I will sign off here and present the complete, you know, nearly ten minutes. Wonderful track by Sheyba into the fourth dimension. I'm DJ Solitare signing off for here, and I'll see you next time.
