Artist: Space Tribe
Song: Geo-Matrix
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 32 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present a track from the 1990s Goa psychedelic dance movement tracks that I remember from back in the 90s, and we're going in sequence here, and we're in the 95-96 season, so tracks that I remember from you know autumn of 95. Six season, so tracks that I remember from you know autumn of '95 through to about summer of '96, and not entirely in order, but we're checking out some of the tracks in that period.

And this one I remember very distinctly because I remember when I got this CD because it was a really exciting event. So I used to go weekly, or in fact, probably a couple of times weekly, to the Tokyo record shops, Cisco Techno store in Shibuya, and then also the Wave CD store. It's a great shop that had a couple of different locations. And I remember in early '96, apparently, is when the CD Was released, and I do remember when I walked into the wave store in Shibuya and went to the trance section or wherever it was and came across this beauty. Of course, have the Order of Nada Volume One, having been my first ever CD in the genre, I was beyond excited to get my hands on this one. And of course, you know. As soon as I picked it up, I looked at the back, and first track was by Space Drive, and it was like, definitely getting this one. Although I knew I would anyway, and that's the track we're going to take a look at today.

Geomatrix, which you know sounds like geometric, which sounds like geometric, which is kind of like what I'm wearing, which is what a lot of the music, in a sense, really sounds like on a bigger system. More so than when you're listening at home. I think. I think some of the shaping really comes across differently. So of course, you know, this track fit very much, given that Oli was producing, you know, so much fractal and fluorescent clothing—not particularly what I'm wearing here—but I wanted to go for something that was a little bit more geometric, and this is one of the four tracks that Oli Wisdom of Space Tribe would produce with Simon Hosford. They were all produced in around '94, possibly into '95. That we know that Oli had told me that you know his first track without Simon That he produced in the UK was the great Spirit, which he played in October '95. So it was produced at some point before then. So I suspect that you know this was at the latest in the first part of '95.

Now the engineering, the sound on this track is quite different from some of the other ones. It's really clean and lean, so it's got a very sort of transparent texture and beautiful rubbery bassline. So it doesn't sound quite as robust and a little bit sort of granular as some of the other ones. So it's it's it's a really really great one. So this CD came out officially, I believe the promos went out in January ninth, and '96, and got into the stores in February '96. So this track is one I actually don't have any clear recollections of having heard it played out back then. Of course, it was a real favorite of mine for several reasons, not just, of course, because I love all of Simon's work and I love all of Ollie's work, but the content of this track is phenomenal, harmonically, melodically, thematically as well with what the spoken samples are saying. And there's a couple of absolutely brilliant effects in here. I I just love. So how about we give it a listen? Geomatrix by Space Drive.

Okay, so this kind of cicada-like sound, Oli would go on to write a track called "Cicadas on DMT." This is what that sounds like—a sort of combination of otherworldly and insect sounds and human sounds, and this interesting rhythmic pattern here. Beautiful harmonic and rhythmic pattern. Let me get some ear here. Let's see how many notes are going on in that bass line. Really rubbery quality. Okay, so that whole spoken sample just really fits with how a lot of us were experiencing the music back then. Love that bleepy sound. Not nearly enough back then or now. Sounds like that, but this whole concept of the music as being some extraterrestrial message and the combination of notes, really brilliant sample. Just the rhythmic elements here, and this sound is something that you know would become more familiar in later Hallucinogen work. It's just really, this otherworldly sort of kind of voice-like characteristic, that rhythm. Notice again, it's pitched, but not with notes. Then that chord, that hallucinogenic kind of sound, and also quite a characteristic one used by space drive. You know, and it's not overtly melodic. It's not like there's a melody here that you're going to sing, but there's you know melodic content, really great combinations of notes that play with an extraterrestrial message. That bounce. And this sample, and you know how these patterns have melodic, harmonic, rhythmic shaping to it ends up becoming very geometric. Listen how this is climbing, I'm going up with those beautiful intervals that we're used to hearing in the tracks. How many layers? Let's see how many, you know, similar stuff, but how much it's compounded, and then this incredible effect here, this incredible pitch slide for those few measures, and then back up, and then this is just, you know, moving in all kinds of directions, left and right, front and back. All these voices in the air. I mean, it really does sound characteristic of some of what we would recognize in the following year as Hallucinogen work. That bass, that bass line still going, and then that other figuration from the opening. Little percussive accent. A little percussive accent. Notice the snares, some really interesting builds. Again, the way you hear everything happening at the same time in that line, and then this sound that we'd hear in snarling Black Mabel. It's just such an interesting drive to it, isn't? Notice how it's not pounding like a lot of music now. That the figurations give the momentum, as well as the textures. These upper frequencies here. Those upper frequencies for them. That's the accent. And again, you know, a lot of it's the rhythm and the sort of where on the frequency range it's located. And you still hear that bassline going in the background. It just has that really hypnotic undertone.

Now we're gonna hear some more of these voices. That sample rather first. I just feel like your the brain is short-circuiting while the sample goes all over. You can hear those voices. Sort of a female one and a male one. Cicadas. There's the bike sound. Ain't that a beauty? I mean, such an incredible track for so many reasons. And the textures, as I said, are beautifully clear. The sounds are, you know, the the rubbery sound. It was really, I thought, quite revolutionary, quite new at the time. The next time I remember really hearing that particular sound is in the hallucigen remix of Jana, the joke track, where there was really that kind of same kind of lean texture and rubbery sound, and then you know those sort of guttural kind of you know really raspy voiced kind of things that are going on, and just absolutely amazing. And Again, I I love that spoken sample and that whole theme of you know harmonic you know combinations of notes that play out an extraterrestrial message. I mean, I don't know where he found that sample. Ollie was so good at finding bizarre spoken samples, but that one is really quite brilliant.

So so there we go. One of the four Space Tribe tracks of Ollie and Simon. So first one that I came across was Machine Elf. Then on the first TIP Comp, then there was Flip Out the Dolphin, which was on the second what was it called? Concept and Dance. Now that one was actually part of a live mix of in the hands of the shaman that I don't recall seeing until Oli's album came out on Spirit Zone in late '96, early '97, and then there was this one. So it's basically that was the third Space Strut track that I heard, and it's a doozy. Still a favorite.

Again, I don't really recall having heard it played out then. I played it out at ZNA in 2019, and I kind of started my set with it. Kind of in that I played a little ambient mishmash intro of the three unreleased tracks that Simon had been involved in that I played at the end of my 2019 set. And so in 2022, sorry I might have misspoken there. So I played it at my opening of 2022, and I did that ambient thing to sort of, kind of bridge, the previous three years, and then I wanted a Space Tribe track to really start the dance portion, because Ollie had died just a year before. So, so that was that. And people were asking me afterwards, "What was that track of Simon's that you played at the beginning?" And I was like, "Oh, the ambient stuff? No, no, no, the dance one." I was like, "It's actually Not Simon's space drive, so of course we recognize Simon's work in that. How could we not? But definitely, there's Ollie in there also, and there's a little bit of Ollie in kind of in a whole lot of the scene, as we know, just at the two-year anniversary since he left us. So, cheers to you, Ollie! Thanks for this brilliant track, great one with the great Simon Posford and Ollie Wisdom.

I'll sign off now and present the whole track without my talking over it. So I'm Mark DJ Solitaire here, leaving you with Space Tribe, Geomatrix. Combinations of geometric patterns, really combinations of notes that play out an extraterrestrial message. Your eyes are wide, wide, dilated. Your eyes are the windows of your brain. They're open.
