Artist: Prana
Song: Pneumatic
Year: 1995

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 37 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 90s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are in my second year of when I was going to these events in Tokyo, '95 to '96, and this track is one that I probably encountered a bit earlier, but that I remember really, you know, in this sort of period that year. It was on a second cassette that Jay made me, Jay from the Odyssey parties that I was going to Every two weeks, and it was a very different sounding mix that he made. There was a lot more sort of techno-ish kind of stuff. I wasn't really into it at the time, but this track really appealed to me, and it's since become a favorite.

And it's quite a different sound, particularly for this project. And so this is Pneumatic by Prana, Prana V1, as I call them, is the first iteration of Prana with Nick Taylor and Tsuyoshi Suzuki. So I asked them a little bit of background about this track, and it turns out that this was the second track that they made at Butterfly Studios. The first one being Mugen , which is also a kind of different sound. So that explains the sort of different sound signature, and I think brings up that reality that back in the day, these artists were using different studios, like they all had different, you know, composites of, you know, sort of combinations of instruments, and that gave somewhat a unique sort of sound signature. Of course, how they worked with those instruments—you know—somebody else with the same studio, you know, might still sound different because of what they were choosing to do with it. But I think this is really, really interesting. Nick said this was the first time they got their hands on a Roland TB-303, so that became one of the Key elements in this track.

There's a lot going on here. It's very, very different, I think, from a lot of what we hear in their, you know, on their album, which came out in '96. I remember getting, but you know, several of those tracks were already done in '94 and some through the '95 period. And Pneumatic came out on the first Matsuri single, in I believe it was February '95, and Scarab was on the other side. So Scarab ended up on the Cyclone album, but not Pneumatic. So again, it's I think it's been a little bit overlooked in a way. It doesn't have sort of that the same kind of spacey, alien quality that I find a lot of, you know, the tracks, particularly on Scarab, sorry, on the Cyclone album, that that tends to have. But I absolutely adore this one.

It's really got this like hyperdrive, hyperspace, tunnel vision, sleek, streamlined kind of sound and the harmonics again. You know, in terms of the note combinations that they're using, once again we have the majors, minors, and perfect intervals, right? And there's one that I found that was quite interesting. It goes, you know, has a perfect fifth, which is there's no major when it comes to fifths and fourths. It's always perfect. What's called perfect fifth, perfect fourth, and minor third, sort of combination as those notes dance between each other. And I'm pretty sure there was a minor second in another sort of combination. So there's there's a lot of really interesting harmonic stuff, rhythmic stuff, all that jazz.

So how about I get this track on, listen to the delightful “Pneumatic” by Prana. Pneumatic by Prana. So notice that first of all the rhythm is like kind of nonstop here. I just love this kind of the sounds. First of all the like water dropletty kind of things, and then this again sounds a little bit like a kind of an alien voice, right? With those note combinations as well. Then wonderful hi-hat rhythm and then the kick. That riff, that's total prana riff. That's really, really distinctive. You know, again, it just sounds like some sort of alien sort of code being sort of beamed down from a satellite.

Now this riff is coming in, this lower riff. Just notice how that's getting a little bit louder notice that interval and then that emphasis again something we've been noticing in the last few tracks is how um several uh riffs have a rhythm that accent a different note then this. This is something that I think adds that real outer space kind of quality. That's very Prana, but again, the sound signature is quite different. And then that kind of whole otherworldly kind of sound. Worldly kind of sound, and then that, and then listen to these notes. And again, very distinctly Prana sounds. But again, I think quite different Instrumentation from what we're used to at this period.

So there's that smooth sound along with that rhythmic. So you know, again, you get that contrast of textures: something that's smooth, legato, and something that's staccato. Ah! Very distinctive riff as well. Also reminds me of their track Message for Eastedge. And just that hypnotic repetition. And we're gonna get a very cool break here. With this. With this, some of that, and percussion is gonna come in. Remember, Tsuyoshi Suzuki was a drummer. There's also some cool, spacey sounds in the background that come in here and there. Let the hi-hat start doing their thing. And that amazing riff.

And get Shikam in here. Again, it's just like you know you're getting beamed, bombarded with these messages that sort of contain some information. The rhythm, the rhythm of that riff, and then there's that other one that sort of emphasizes the offbeat. Again, there's something so it's both uplifting and inquisitive about that kind of riff. Sort of really defines the energy, I think, of the best music of that time. And the rhythm of that riff too. It's not all on the strong beats. You can hear that 303 really going there. That one's a killer. Little rhythm with the drums happening there too. Just that I don't know. It's hard to describe that sound. That sort of glassy, metallic kind of sheen.

There's that other one working its way in there all these different sounds and textures and chords I love, again, that patterning that just goes down and goes up. Again, I think that's something that's just not nearly done enough nowadays. So sleek. As you'll notice, there's that smooth stuff, and there's the texture, you know, the 303 with that rhythm, things going up and down. That's your catchy riff. That one note kind of mantra that that provides, that's the one that's got the fifth and fourth. Listen how many things are happening at the same time. Unbelievable. I think it's going to drop out here. Just left with that. Ain't that something? Absolutely phenomenal track. So much ahead of its time.

So again, I realize this is really more of a '94-'95 season track. My memory of it comes from a bit later, and you know, if it was released in early '95, this was done in '94. And I mean, this is really cutting edge in terms of composition, like musical content. There is so much richness going on there. So as I noted, you know, lots of things with different rhythmic patterns, different voicings, things that are going up and down. There's that kind of patterning that we've heard just from the very beginning, where it's there's not an actual note on the scale for it, but we can hear sort of the the frequency of it goes up and down, which Again, gives us a sense of relativity when we're on the dance floor, you know, from one moment to the next, and all those different harmonic patterns, right, with all those different intervals of majors, minors, and perfect intervals dancing around. It just really adds so much. A combination of that uplifting with mysterious and evocative. It's Really marvelous track.

When it came to the title, Nick Taylor couldn't remember exactly, but he thought that you know, Pneumatic came about just because this is a track that really builds from the tension is coming from the inside, right? So pretty cool one. So there we go, the masterpiece by Prana, Pneumatic, which I will now leave you with to listen to without my talking over it. So I'm Mark DJ Solitare. Thank you for tuning in. See you next time, and in the meantime, enjoy once more, Pneumatic by Prana.
