Artist: X-Dream
Song: Create Your Own Happiness
Year: 1995–1996

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 40 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. Tracks that I remember from the period, and we are about partway through, probably about halfway through the 1995-96 season, I'm planning on wrapping this one up at the end of the year and then going into the 96-97 season.

And I mean, it's about time that I featured this project. And the reason they're coming so late is it was actually really mid 96 before I consciously heard their music, bought their music, and heard the amazing track that we're going to be listening to today. And this is X-Dream. I can now move the screen since I've dressed for the occasion and made the reveal. Who on this compilation that I got in? I believe it was late June or early July, 1996, which I spoke to when I presented a shitty stick from this compilation. And last track on here is "Create Your Own Happiness." Was not the first time this was released, but was licensed, as was often and done in those days, right? And that's what was again so amazing about those times. Things were a lot less proprietary.

And so, X-Dream. Let's face it, legendary project. Everybody loves X-Dream. Two great musicians, Marcus Maichel and Jan Müller. Hopefully my German pronunciation is okay there, guys. Super lovely guys, still really active in the scene. Went through a lot of different evolutions with their music, and it's all fascinating to listen to. But this track was the first one that I heard and that I remember. I probably heard Pollinator and a few other ones. Jay, I'm sure, would have played at the Odyssey parties. But as I recounted in the Shitty Stick video, I came back from India and was on the phone with Gio Makyo, and he's like, "You got to get this Flying Rhino First Flight CD," you know. And so I got it at the Wave CD shop, and he just said every track is amazing, and he was telling me all about each one, and you know the extreme one, last track on here, right? Create Your Own Happiness.

I mean, what a philosophy! And I think really part of the the mindset that kind of drew us into these events, right, where we started to recognize that we have a consciousness, we started to recognize that we have thinking patterns. You know, I think a lot of I certainly wasn't really conscious of my capacity to have a role in my mindset until I really got into these events and really got out of my structured self, structured perception of music, way that we interact at events, and so on.

So I mean, this is really just such an incredible track, absolutely magical in so many ways, lots of upbeat elements, several things contributing to this. So not much background really that I need to give about that. I actually didn't reach out to the guys to ask for technical information. I just was deciding what to do and decided today this is the one I'm going to do. So this is the one I'm going to do, and this is the one we're going to hear, and I think this is the one that we're all going to enjoy because what a magical track! Here we go, X-Dream. Create Your Own Happiness.

I love these little raindrop sounds, and you know this sort of thing would be blended in over other elements in the previous track. The rhythm. Now, this just this repeated note with that rhythm is really like these trumpets, these celestial sort of clarion call. Got a story about that. I hope I'll remember to tell after. And then there's another little sound that's going to start sneaking in here. And notice how those different lines are so clear. And we get that beautiful, rich, X-Dream bass. That beautiful kick. Just really nice hard chakra kick, not overpowering at all. This is where you know it doesn't need to be an alpha male kick. This is really gets you going. This is you know got a little bit more of a bit of a galloping kind of atmosphere that's not that stereotypical annoying galloping bassline of modern psy trance. Just you know that little. The adjusting of that looping of these voices really creates this trance-like effect. Just that little drop, and then a little bit of a hand clap there.

Then we've got two different elements coming in there, those kind of squelchy, distorted things. And that upper sort of, you know, that kind of trumpet-y kind of triumphant voice. Voice. Just a really simple riff that, holy moly, it just hooks you. And another great little break here. Wow. You'll notice that modulations this is all going through. Beautiful pause. Those note changes and sort of that legato.

And then they created their own society and then just that rhythm. I mean, just the power. You get the right rhythm, the right sound, and just one note is all you need. It really does it. This is kind of that call and answer, and it really does sound a little bit voice-like. So again, when you're sort of in that state on the dance floor, outdoors, ideally, and listening on a big system, just like these angels or aliens talking to you, and those little utterances, emphatic, emphasizing the point here, that beautiful break, beautiful beautiful little interval.

And now we've got that legato line again that was part of that break. Beautiful sequencing and storyline, isn't it? That's hypnotic, right? I mean, and this is really like, you know, you're in this auto suggestion kind of state while this message is going on, and there's that echo from it. So you know the sound waves are just washing over you and through your being and hopefully helping you in that receptive state to adopt this philosophy. That whoa, whoa, whoa, that kind of engine sound. There's those little laughs, laughing with you, not at you. That's a beautiful, light, airy sound. I mean, all of the textures are just exquisite.

Just that rhythm. It's gonna be a beautiful shift that this line goes through here. Some of that little other voice coming out of it. Again, this is that full experience that we have of, you know, the tracks keep building and building and building. And it goes from, you know, that note value or that sort of tone sound to something that's just got pitch, but not the note. And then... Beautiful intervals, just really, really simple, very uplifting.

We'll be right back. I have those emphatic bursts. Again, just that looping gets you in that trance-like state. A little bit of a laughing coming in. You still have a little bit of the upper rhythmic stuff, right? You just lost the kick, the bass line is still there. I love that bass. Love that bassline, and then that upper sound just comes out.

They created their own society. We created our own happiness. What we did. Hmm, just such a beautiful, beautiful track.

Now, X-Dream is just brilliant in that they were this project who, you know, they went through several phases and evolutions, as all great artists do. And at the same time, they would have a lot of different styles. So I'm going to be featuring quite a bit of them when we get into '97, '98. You know, their album, groundbreaking album Radio. I had a few particular flavors there, but there were so many other tracks that they had out at the same period that were completely different in atmosphere. A really varied project, always musically top-notch, production utterly astounding. The musical content and everything about the music was just absolutely astounding, and still it absolutely still carries a tremendous amount of power on the dance floor.

So it's going to be hard for me to choose when we when we get into that ninety seven ninety eight period, especially ninety six. Of course, there's one got late ninety six, I should say. I've got quite a few stories about this one track, probably most popular track in London at the time. But had to share this one, and at a time where you know our mood is really much more somber after you know what's gone on for our friends in Israel and what's still going on, you know, not to be glib at all about just Create Your Own Happiness. You know that sounds heartless, but you know, hopefully we can remember that we have, you know, that we can gather together again. Remember the energy of the scene that drew us to it, and I think there are other elements, of course. I mean, for me, the nighttime power of the scene, of the nighttime music, I think is something I need to explore. You know, some of how the the dark music really has a very strong effect on the light, and I just hold this track as a kind of, you know, end of set kind of track of what it is that we're all aiming for with the scenes. So hopefully this can be a little bit of an imagined light at the end of the tunnel kind of thing.

I'm trying to think how often I've played this out. I don't think I played it out much or even at all once I took the name Solitaire in '98. I remember when I had just moved to England, and it was probably in the spring of '97. Yeah, it must have been. It wouldn't have been in the autumn of '96. So in spring of '97, I was playing this little outdoor gathering with just a bunch of friends, and one of the guys who was there who was playing this is the fellow who worked, who ran the label that released the first GMS album. You know that it didn't have a label name; it just had all those alien sort of hieroglyphics. Fabulous guy, Steve. And this was one of the tracks that I played. It was in the morning. There was just a few people gathered in a field, and he just came up to me. He was raving about this. He's like, "Oh, you know, when you put this on at this time, this is just like a clarion call of just , you know, this, of, you know, what it is that we're, you know, he was so enthusiastic, even though he had a completely different style and fabulous music. My God, this guy had great music. I've got one, a couple of things I'll be referring to later on, but it was a really, you know, he really got the energy that I was aiming for, and he articulated it so beautifully as he always did about music, he really got it, and that's what it is about this track. You know, there is just this real sense of unbridled optimism, and you know, playing it outdoors on a sunny morning in a field was really, was really wonderful.

I'm gonna have to put this in my shortlist for an upcoming set. In any case, that's it for this episode. At least for the talking part of this episode, I am going to sign off and then let the whole track play without my blabbering over it. So I am Mark DJ Solitare, leaving you now with the masterpiece by X-Dream, Create Your Own Happiness.

They created their own society that's right we created our own happiness that's what we did they created their own society. We created our own happiness. That's what we did.
