Artist: DJ Cosmix & Etnica
Song: Kumba Mela
Year: 1995

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 41 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present my favorite tracks from the 90s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And we are in the thick of season 95, 96. So from tracks that I mostly came across in the sort of autumn of '95 through the summer of '96, and this is one that I remember that I got on CD sometime in that season. It was released on vinyl probably just around that autumn, and I definitely heard it played at an outdoor party. Kuni loved this track and played it at those Equinox indoor and outdoor parties, and I'll be speaking about that a little bit more later. And this is “Kumba Mela” by DJ Cosmix and Etnica.

Cosmix being Klaus Drewing, German DJ, and Etnica being Ethnika. German DJ and Etnica being Etnica, the Italian project who's just you know featured many times here and will many times again both as Etnica and also as The Pleiadians. I got it on the CD at Wave in Japan under 2,000 yen. Debate is open as to whether it was worth more or less, some very good tracks on here. This is the first track on here, so this is when I first remember hearing it, and that there is an open air recording of Kuni playing, probably that September 1995 party that I was talking about several times from the first episode, it was the one that featured Rhythmystec, so so I definitely was hearing this track around, and it's a doozy.

Now, Maurizio “Mauri” Begotti filled me in a little bit. He said that Klaus DJ Cosmix, great DJ, only heard him once at Solipse in 1999 in Hungary, where I took this photo of him. He traveled by train with his Roland Juno-106, and this to their studio. This is when they were still at the what was the name, the Sound Busters Studio that Etnica was using at the time. And so this was the first time that they used the Juno 106 in their tracks. And so they produced two tracks, Moon Valley and “Kumba Mela”, and these came out on a Matsuri Productions vinyl and EP. The track title “Kumba Mela”, the title comes from a festival in India that takes place every 12 years, and Maurizio “Mauri” Begotti said that a friend was visiting them at the time and was telling them about the festival, so they just called it that.

Now, so there's a lot going on in this track, and when I was listening to it just before filming, I was just like, "How am I going to talk about all this awesomeness?" I mean, this is really a doozy. There's the atmosphere, which is incredibly mystical, and this real combination of ethereal, introspective, perspective with some uplifting thrown in, but definitely a bit of angst and all kinds of emotions. Just wait till I get to some of the Canadian tracks later on in '97. And you know, when I sent Maurizio “Mauri” Begotti actually just a little excerpt when I was listening to it, he's like, "Ah, 106," and I was it's like I I'm kind of happy I don't know what the synths are I just hear the sounds I hear the music and this is kind of what I talked about in a lot of episodes and in the one question series that's on that hypnotic LFO series where I was just talking about you know hearing music in its purest form you know not hearing a piano or a violin or you know this kind of organic instrument. The producers recognize the sounds, and I'm just like, I just hear, you know, the sounds of the undulations of the universe and voices being beamed down to us from other dimensions and so on. So, I'm still happy to be in that state of ignorant bliss and just enjoying the music.

So, there's a lot of cool stuff here, a lot of really cool lines and a lot of things that just loop over, loop over, loop over, and then they just they break out. And sometimes the same synth sound will actually evolve, like that line changes into something else, and it's just fantastic. So, guess we might as well get started on this amazing track, “Kumba Mela” by DJ Cosmix and Etnica. Cosmix and Etnica.

Love this pattern. Now notice the pause on that beat. That really adds this kind of finality to this beautiful riff. And these kind of this sounds like almost this electromagnetic field being activated, and these kind of wispy clouds, either in space or in the forest or whatever dimension, both at the same time. And no more of those kinds of echoey voices. I love this sound. This this just starts to add some real drama and some of that angst and tension. You're going to notice a drop of octave as well. It's being echoed. Then, just listen to those notes. Again, there's major and minor intervals going on here, right? So that's just adds that kind of between dimensions kind of feeling. And then the kick, which is much bigger than it sounds like. We'll be talking about that later.

Now, on a big system, when you're hearing this, all of these patterns sound kaleidoscopic. So again, the challenge of listening, you know, in a small system is, you know, we hear the sounds and they're really nice and clear, but you don't hear like this. Because, like, you know, sounds on a circuit board or this kaleidoscope, this kind of multidimensional. You know, you can recognize this as Etnica in in several ways, but also the synth sound is different. This is really just it's beautiful, beautiful sound. Not saying the other ones aren't, but it's very distinctive. I love this. It's like these little afterthoughts, sort of floating up in the air.

Listen to the storyline. Listen to how many evolutions there's been, and all these voices. Upper voice there as well, with that kind of piercing quality. Now, starting to sneak in here, this little version of his voice, and it's doubled there. The way goes down and up, just keeps repeating, and then it's going to go through a little evolution. Which helps you to do the same thing on the dance floor. This is like the most perfect pre-sunrise track. It's just starting to get lighter.

So many sounds. You have to really pay attention, and you can hear all these different textures and sounds going on. There's sort of tonal ones and atonal ones. There's a little bit of that kind of, a little bit of a UFO voice in the background that sounds cool. I love the different. There's different textures, and some of them are more detached, and some are smoother. Really adds dimension. There's really. I just find that that melodic riff really has some amazing angst and emotion to it, and it's. And it's that's going to come to a peak actually in a second. Just have a little pause from it.

And this is really like calling out to some higher power. And it goes up and up. And Again, that detached pattern that's in there, and this beautiful melody under it, as well. So beautifully done. That whole thing is going to come back. You know that kind of that melody has this again this sort of both other cultural and also extraterrestrial kind of ethnic quality to it. You know, in a sense of it's really this germ, this kind of language that sounds like it belongs to somewhere else, and it's really infusing some power or some real message in there. I just love it. Again, that detached kind of quality, the echoes that are going on.

Now, this is a bit different. It's one of those sounds. I mean, again, you know, people will hear what synth it is. I'm just hearing this beautiful melody and this kind of otherworldly sound. When it goes up again. Just adds this extra import, like this real drama and urgency. There's that voice that's like going up and down all the way throughout. Now. That electro-magnetic mist, and then, one last... It's that last presentation of that riff and then it all just fades into nothingness. Wow.

Now, that is a track that I actually I don't think I've played out. That is a really tough one in a way because it really needs to be the right time. And this is where I think a point that I've made before and that I'll reiterate several times with some tracks. You know, what Olli Wisdom told me about DJing: said it's ninety-five percent track selection, you know, right track, right time, and you know that's not something I'm going to play on a blazing sunny afternoon. I'm not sure I would play it in the dark of night. I think that's really when three or four in the morning, depending on the time of year, just when you're starting to see a little bit more light, you're starting to see more definition around you, and you know maybe an hour before sunrise, and you're starting to see more. So it depends. There's a whole range of times in there, I think there's a one hour period when you can probably play this at its best, and that's when it's really going to work.

I think there's been a loss in our party culture of that sense of what works at what time. I remember in the, you know, all through the 2000s, everybody was playing all this like just sad, annoying, awful music, you know, around sunrise time. It was like morning music that was spelled M O U R N I N G, like somebody had just died. Um, so yeah, not the vibe. This though really demands being played at the right time, and that's my vision of it anyway. And I'm pretty sure that's when I would have heard it. I can imagine sort of on a slower part, you know, once the lights out, and you know the party's maybe winding down. But I, I think it's got that right mystical vibe for that sort of you're starting to see, uh, you know, as the as that that sort of mystical time when the the day is starting to break, um, or it's just starting that process.

Now, um, I mentioned that Kuni had played this probably in September Ninety-five, and that's because there's an open air sort of open mic recording that somebody made on a MiniDisc recorder. We think it's still a little confusing. There is one that we know of Olli Wisdom a couple of weeks later, and then there's this one. This is definitely not Olli Wisdom because I played this for him and he's like, "Yeah, that's not me." He could tell from the mixing. And there's several things that are really interesting. I've got about a minute excerpt that I'm going to play now.

The sound, of course, is muffled, right? But what you're going to hear two things. At least I can hear two two things, particularly around this. Um, one is the size of the kick, like on a big system. I mean, this is just massive. It sounds completely different, I think, to what we're listening to here and I think that shows the difference that there is when we experience this music on a big system. There's also the fact that you know this 30 minute stretch that I've got recorded of Cooney playing. Mixing is pretty basic. Now, what I just said about Olli Wisdom saying that you know 95% is track selection. Boy, we did not care about the mixing, we didn't even notice it.

And what I hear in how he sequenced these tracks together and how they were placed there is really this otherworldly tribal atmosphere. With what it sounds like, and it really used to be the case back then, and I still think it is, that when A certain DJ played a track. It sounded different than if another DJ played the same track. I think it's still the case. I don't think the DJs are necessarily infusing their own energy into their sets in quite the same way, so maybe we don't notice it as much, or I don't know what. I think my sets sound different than that other people's sets, and their sets sound different than other people's sets. I think you know that's that's how it works, and I think part of that is the the way it's put together, and I think there is something inescapable with a sense of identity that anybody brings. So Kuni really was a master at creating a whole range of atmospheres, and he really got the kind of storyline, but that definitely that big tribal kind of sound.

So just going to play this one minute excerpt. Again, you know the the sound is not great. I'm going to boost this a little bit more, and I think I'm not going to talk over it, just so that you can hear more of what's going on with the poor sound quality. Just try to soak in the atmosphere. Just notice what it is that you observe. Listen to the patterns. I mean, you know that sounds different. I think than what we just heard. I mean, of course it sounds like crap because the sound is really bad. But I think you can pick up on some of that tribal atmosphere and just listen to this portion of how the kick sounds with the rest of it.

Now, of course, it's not a clear recording. There's all of that, but I think there's a little flavor that you can capture from the atmosphere. You know, it's recording the what was in the air, and yeah, I don't know. I listened back to this, and I was completely transformed. It just gave me this instant flashback to sort of you know what the vibe was like at those parties. But I think it really reiterates the fact that you know listening to this these tracks at home, you're gonna get a very different experience, and it is absolutely more than once. I've got a great story about this, actually, from that same party that I played in the U.K. in '97. We played another track, and somebody just didn't recognize it, and when I named it, it was like, I've Got that, you know. I'll tell the story again once we get to that specific track, but that's what it's like. It's happened to me many times. I have this track. I listened to it at home and I didn't like it because you're not hearing it in context.

So now this track is a great one for listening at home because it's just gorgeous. It has all those beautiful melodies and hooks and the atmosphere, and you can hear it. But again, the experience in that full spectrum kind of atmosphere is a whole other story.

All right, well, I think it is time to sign off and leave you with the full track on its own. And so I will do that now. Mark DJ Solitare here signing off and leaving you with DJ Cosmix and Etnica’s masterpiece “Kumba Mela”.
