Artist: Juno Reactor
Song: Guardian Angel
Year: 1994

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 45 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. It's hard deciding what to feature because there's, you know, way more tracks than I can ever really include and actually keep us moving through the years because we're in the '95 '96 season right now. You know, there's at least 50 tracks a year I could be focusing on, and I'm doing about half of that. And with this artist, it's hard when there's like this gorgeous album. How am I just going to choose one track? So I don't know. Maybe I'm going to have to start doing episodes where I focus on entire albums. Take a while, but I sure love this album. I love all the albums that this incredible artist produced.

This is one that came out. It actually came out earlier in '95, sort of before I'm starting like September as the season kind of thing. But there was a launch party in Tokyo, which I didn't get to go to, which is really annoying. And because I was in Canada in August, but in August '95 they had a launch party in Tokyo for Juno Reactor's incredible album Beyond the Infinite. I have the flyer for that party, which is a beauty. It was Equinox, the Tokyo Techno Tribe folks, that produced that party. My sister and her friends went because they were still in Japan, and I was really gutted that I wasn't there. I was doing my annual trip to Canada and first summer after my Goa introduction, discovering what a vast wasteland it was in terms of Goa stuff. So anyway, so I missed this party, which really gutted me.

But Juno Reactor was a major sound that we heard in events then, especially at the Equinox parties. Kuni definitely played, definitely played stuff from the first album. I remember a couple. I remember at that outdoor party in September '95, I remember absolutely. He played the Loyaliser, which is on the Blue Room compilation, Outside the Reactor, and who knows what else. I mean, you know, it was all this was kind of the album was kind of new to me at the time, but I absolutely love the entire thing. The whole storyline is amazing, and I love how like there's some tracks that are much slower, and then you know the vibe completely shifts. And there's this phenomenal, phenomenal story.

Several musicians involved in the whole album, but this track that we're going to listen to is like “High Energy Protons”, produced with Ben Watkins and Mike McGuire. I I asked Ben if he had any background to share, and there's one kind of cool story. So it was it was produced at his studio in Shoreditch. It was in a kind of Dickensian warehouse that people swore was haunted. His his assistant said she was sure she could see ghosts there, and they were mixing, mixing Guardian Angel, and you know everybody was all hands on, so everybody would decide to, you know, they would usually do more than one mix. And the first mix that they did ended up being the mix that they used, because when they tried doing the next mix, a spark of electricity shot through the room, speakers jumped into the air, landed on the mixer and took out seven channels. So it was like, okay, that's the that's the end of that track. So I said, there's electrical noise like a thunderbolt on the DAT tape there as well. So message from guardian angels or whatever, perhaps.

Uh, this is an absolutely phenomenal track for several reasons. We're going to hear um some of this uh some instrumentation that will sound a lot like one of their big hits from later on. But what I love about Juno in general is the dramatic orchestral, operatic, big-scale sound. You know, this is what I think is—you know—it stands our scene apart. Is the capacity for all these different sounds and styles and range of sonorities and really the storytelling, how each track is a complete story and so many twists and turns, and you know each track becomes a microcosm for life, and then you put it together with another one, and you just have everything's an adventure. And this track is definitely an adventure. So beautiful, long introduction, which I also love, and I miss the days when folks would play these long introductions complete. I do that sometimes, depending, and I think with the right track, it really pays off. And I think this is one where, yeah, it really should be done. So, always lots I can talk about, lots that I will talk about while we listen. Let's put on Juno Reactor's, Guardian Angel.

Okay, so it's beautiful little wave that starts happening here. That gated chorus. Again, it just really— it almost sounds like you know Greek drama, the Greek kind of celestial chorus, council of beings. There could be again guardian angels. Anything you want, anything at all? Then, foreshadowing of “Pistolero”. Beautiful intervals, crisp, crisply played. All the sounds. Again, there's that really analog, right, strumming of the strings over here, and then the the drama, those chords. Anything you want, anything at all, come to me? The rhythm here, both the rhythm and just that repeated note, really builds up the momentum. This is really key here for the key shift, and there's going to be a beautiful slide. Really dramatic. Then there's going to be. If you just want anything at all, come to me. I'll be your Guardian Angel. Beautiful sample, and this kind of oscillating bassline, right? With a call and answer, and all those major, minor, perfect intervals. Again, it still hasn't fully kicked in yet. Deep kick, those gated voices as well, laser zaps. Listen to the different textures, all a variety of sounds, incredible, and the rhythms.

And then, what is that? Never heard that kind of sound before. It was definitely the first place that I'd ever heard that particular synth sound. This is a bit of high energy protons sort of flavoring with the, you know, sort of being, all these blessings being rained down on you from the heavens. And just notice that chord change. Great percussion, right? And Juno would get into some amazing work with percussionists later on. All the texture there, incredible. Then we get that sort of cyber-rock sound that we got a lot with them, including that Loyalizer remix. This is kind of both triumphant and insistent and anguished kind of quality to this riff.

Okay, so first of all this really sounds like you're in space with those noises. I love those riffs. It really sounds like you're in space with those noises. Some echoing up. I love how there's this closed loop to that riff, and then it just lets loose. Always, harmonically, just always brilliant, brilliant stuff going on with Juno Reactor. I mean, this is really like, it's like Star Wars. I mean, honestly, the otherworldly flavor here is incredible. Gorgeous intervals. What a story so far, huh? Again, hi-hats don't sound like hi-hats, right? They're just serving that function on that frequency. Incredible momentum. I'm really in love with that growling sound now. Great, just lets loose on that upper frequency that opened up as it was building, those laser zaps happening. We've done more of that sort of cyber rock kind of thing. I love that oscillating bass line. Just got that really beautiful gnarly kind of sound. Then, just sort of echoes off along with those voices as it fades and mixes into the next track on the CD.

I mean, honestly, you just always need a break after a set like that, after a track like that. I mean, and this is kind of one of the things, you know, why the tracks were structured that way. It was not meant to be just beat mixed all the way through. You're going through this whole journey. You know, neuroanatomists will say that you need these pauses because that's when the information that you've gained will fill in. And so when it's just kick nonstop , you kind of don't have that break for something to happen. Now, of course, there's breaks within the tracks, but if there's breaks within a track, it's fascinating that you know DJs will be all sort of like, you know, I can't have any breaks between tracks. It breaks in the track. So then, if you're mixing a story and you're mixing it well, it doesn't matter when the break takes place. You just don't want too many of them. You need a little bit of that breathing room, and these beautiful, spacious intros and outros in Juno tracks are part of it.

You know, each track is a story, and then you put all these stories together, and it's like, wow, drama. And that's what you would go through at parties back then. You know, with this kind of music being mixed, all these different flavors, all these languages, and it's like you're tuning into some cosmic TV channel and sort of getting all these different, you know, soap operas. It seems, and you just go through all these amazing chapters. And so this was, you know, Juno was one of the major sounds really from from that period for me in Tokyo, where definitely Kuni was every set. There was going to be some Juno tracks, and he really did spacious mixing, and it worked. And you know, when there's a beautiful track like this, there's nothing that I want to cut out? That's kind of one of the challenges sometimes. So finding the way to do that skillfully without losing the tension on the dance floor—it's—it's not always easy.

But, um, so there we go—the opening track of an absolutely incredible, incredible album. Um, first three Juno albums in particular are absolutely iconic. I mean, you know, their entire output is, but those three were just pushing the edge of musical content and storytelling and style and technology in terms of the mixing, and it's just a whole other dimension. So there we go. Really happy to listen to this track again. I sort of over the last week listened through the album multiple times and was just like transported back to that magical time in the 90s and just the timelessness. I think that this music all points to. So I will sign off and leave you with the full track without my talking over it.
