Artist: Slinky Wizard
Song: Lunar Juice
Year: 1994

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 46 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And today is a little bit of a departure from the norm because I'm featuring two tracks, but related, an original and a remix. And although we're in the '95-'96 season, the remix was issued in '96, which is the reason why I'm featuring it now. And I decided to include the original because the remixer actually prefers the original to his own remix. I beg to differ, but that's what's fun about all of this, right? We're all going to have our own preferences.

Now, I love both. It's a phenomenal original track, which was on the first mixtape that Jay from the Odyssey Parties gave me in late 1994. It was, you know, just a couple of months into my exposure to this music, so I was like very excited, and I knew every track, recognized every track that was on here. And then when the remix came out in the summer of '96, I was absolutely floored.

So the track is Slinky Wizard's Lunar Juice, which was released on a vinyl in '94, and which came out on CD. It was a Flying Rhino vinyl, and it came out on CD in April '95. At least is when I got my copy on the first TIP compilation. And the Hallucinogen Moon Strudel remix came out in the summer of '96 on this phenomenal First Flight Flying Rhino CD. First track on the CD, and it is a doozy. Now they're both doozies, and they are both fantastic and quite different in character, as we'll be exploring.

So, few details about the track. It first of all had a different working title. Now I'm not sure how Lunar Juice came up. Neither was Simon and wasn't able to connect with any of the slinky fellas in time when the question came up, but I know that the title, a working title, was "Dance of light" because I found the session DAT at Simon's, and here it is, May fifteenth, nineteen ninety-four, and it was very clear why. That would be the working title, based on a sample. The first part of the sample, and it comes from the movie The Abyss. You hear some more familiar words that you'll recognize from the track, but the second part, which I've never noticed, the actual words in the in the track, has the words dance of light? So just it was a machine. It was a machine, but it was alive. It was like a like a dance of light. There we go. And I mean, pretty cool title, anyway. When you consider how does it feel when we're when we're dancing on the dance floor to this crazy music.

So when it comes to the slinky guys and who was there at the sessions, looking at the label, right? We see the names over here, and we see the name Boyd, which was Adam Boyd, who would die tragically in an accident in '94. And he's referred to as the Rhino in the Sky, and all of the Flying Rhino releases were dedicated to him. And they had a commemorative CD that came out called Boyd in the Void. Now his name is listed over here, and Simon doesn't remember him being at the session, and he thinks that the accident happened before this. He only met him once or twice, so perhaps his name was included as a tribute. But Ronnie was there, Ronnie Biggs, and Dominic Lamb, and George Barker, and of course Simon working his magic. And James Monro might have been there. Again, I wasn't able to sort of get full confirmation from everyone. So, but in any case, you know, Adam is there in name and certainly in spirit as he was for all the Flying Rhino productions.

Simon gave me a little bit of technical info on on the track, which I'll do my best to communicate without messing up too much. He said the growling bass in the original, was his attempt to recreate a sound that he'd sort of accidentally created, which is a recurring theme. A lot of folks sort of you know experimented and did things they shouldn't do, and then hey, something cool happened. And it was recreating a sound he'd come up with in Alpha Centauri, which went through his OSCar synthesizer, and he couldn't get what he wanted, but this is what he got. So it's that growling bass, and then the first bass that comes in about 30 seconds into the track is a Roland Juno-106, which is in all of his dub tracks, and he thinks is better for the dub stuff than for trance because it doesn't have the attack or the bite. But I mean, it works really well over here.

And he, the only other thing he said was, you know, it was kind of a hectic session, and this is kind of the case apparently with Wizard as well. The thing he said it was you know it was kind of a hectic session and this is kind of the case apparently with Wizard as well where you know Simon was quite experienced at mixing and the other fellows weren't and say oh do this do that you know all of that was happening. So Wizard took place in late '93 I think we found out from the previous DAT and this one is you know close to mid '94. One of them was in the upstairs room at Butterfly Studios the other one was in the downstairs room, not sure which.

So I thought, why not do a different kind of episode and feature both tracks? Since Simon actually prefers the original, I had scheduled the remix for this period because that's the one that really struck me. And you know, trying it's hard to not do two tracks by the same producers in each season, but it's actually going to be kind of impossible, and I'm going to break that mold again next week. So, so I'm going to do both. You know, a couple of folks mentioned that last time I did a remix and said, "Why don't you feature both?" And could do longer episodes. This is going to be a longer episode.

So, we're going to start off with the original "Lunar Juice" by Slinky Wizard. So nice, kind of growling sounds, right? With that weird laugh, definitely inspires some kind of mood and thoughts. So, I mean, musically, not as much going on here. Not necessarily useful for a mix, you know, unlike some intros. But totally fine. There's going to be quite a whoosh. And there we go. There's that Juno 106. Great bounce. Again, notice the rhythm. And then another whoosh and this gorgeous grinding sound. And then a very cool sample that gets you in a good mood. Mood could lead to a bit of a british trip out of like so far just wait so I love the combination of that bass and that grinding sound and those great hi-hats notice the effect on the hi-hats so it's the sound is not consistent so always phasing and changing, and that build-up.

This is that sound that I would, you know, similar to that Green Nuns special that I named, right? Where those things are constantly climbing, kind of crosshatch and kind of a. It's just so good for your mood to have this kind of thing happening, right? Because it's like things are consistent but changing, and they're going up, right? So it really takes you along with it. Then there's that other kind of harmonic little element coming in there. It's really quite gritty, isn't it? And then a little pause, right? So the mood lightens a little bit. Catch your breath slightly. Have a little giggle. And maybe just think, uh, it's wonderful. Hi-hats come back. There's that british optimism. And then this great whoosh. Really triumphant. I mean, so uplifting. And notice the rhythm with it, and then the attack. Hear that echoing, that second voice, the layer coming in? A little one-beat break in the percussion there, and then this chord, and then this this fabulous riff.

Now we've got some sounds that were in “Oscillator” from The Infinity Project here it's got some of that dark broody feeling from there also probably similar time Where is that? Sorry. So I think, so I think, dance of light is there, but it's very, very faint. The machine quote is much louder. Offbeat, syncopation, the percussion. Again, another sort of little coasting break, some hand claps, always need some hand claps. Just love that the rhythm keeps you on your toes, and that beautiful bounce, and then that riff. And then there's like that counterpoint, right? That lower one introduced this one, and those weird laughs always used to trip me out. All these layers, and notice again, also all the different registers that are being used by different sounds. There's a little now. Ah, there's a darker undertone there. That's what reminds me of “Oscillator” as well, and that pitch shift, like grinding, is happening in the background.

So there's all these different moods, right? You hear how it's like really uplifting, but it's got this dark undercurrent, and that's kind of like that major-minor stuff we talked about, you know, where there's this pull of different feelings and emotions simultaneously. And he's like climbing again. This sounds more like more of the kind of galloping sound that we like to hear. I mean, wow, now shortest track, eh? Six minutes twenty seconds, so not not super long. Tons of content. I mean, tons going on there.

Now the remix is a longer. That is eight minutes fifteen seconds. So that is like two minutes longer. It's thirty percent longer, folks. If my higher mathematics is accurate. So it's and it's a great one. And the you know it lacks some of that more granular rough quality to that's in this track that gives it that really signature sound. Now it's not entirely consistent. If you think about this, you know “Lunar Juice” one and then Wizard, and Wizard is a lot more refined and elegant and streamlined in and sound, and that's kind of one of the things that I really like about the the Moon Strudel remix that Hallucinogen did.

Simon thinks he probably did this this one at home later. Now the DAT box for the session shows a live mix. That desk mix is different than this Moon Strudel situation. That's really like a proper desk mix that nobody has played out except me at Apsara in 2023. And you know it's like 11 or 12 minutes long, and it's pretty cool. It's just a very slow buildup. Again, doesn't quite have the granular growling quality that this one does.

And one of the reasons I like the Moonstrudel remix, which Simon, by the way, said he couldn't remember exactly about the title, but he did like frozen strudels. So, you know, maybe it was a full moon or something like that. It wasn't a full moon or new moon at the original session, May fifteenth, nineteen ninety-four, because I dug up a lunar calendar and it wasn't. Thank you, Google.

So let's listen to Simon's incredible remix of this track, which, by the way, I played at ZNA in 2019 and was possibly the biggest reaction in my set. People went absolutely nuts, and I think you know the slower BPM with from you know what's become the average, and what was even starting to be the average then, you know, as it was getting closer to 138, 140, and this is lower, I think 134, if I remember correctly. Um, it really got people going, and the content can then build in a different ways. And I think it's much more. This one builds more internally, where there's more of that external excitement in the original. So, let's give this a listen.

The Moon Strudel remix by Hallucinogen of Slinky Wizard's “Lunar Juice”. It's gonna start out with more atmospheric noise, sort of that watery sound from the abyss, I suspect. So, very similar, very familiar, a little effect on the laughing, then again some more more of that dark growling. Three times. We don't have nearly enough whooshes these days, I love the way this pattern goes up and down. I love that. Starts going through some phases. I love the beauty of this bass line and just that consistency. While this one goes through changes. I'm going to you can start hearing some note values change here, or some, you know, the pitch change. Very cool little break here. So much more creative than these breaks that people do nowadays.

Another whoosh. Another whoosh, some of that bounce, and then that after-playing-around-without-laugh. All this stuff going on, and now the main melody comes in this unbelievable way that makes the place just explode. Really triumphant. And a quick break right before it peaks. Really a lot of tension and excitement here. Really explosive. So just on the edge of the tone. Beautiful catchy riff, isn't it? Is that darker growling sound? Sound. Percussion pulls out a bit there. Just that rhythm and then that octave jump. Oh, there's all this beautiful light, beautifully textured in the background. It's a higher, um, sounds like a higher pitch for this galloping sound. I love this part here. Very hallucinogenic. Going up and down.

So it's like those three statements then answered by the fourth and there's that counterpoint now where we call an answer with that upper one and now it's just like looping and just sort of getting lost in the repetition of it. And again, that percussion coming out, and the air kind of clears a little bit. And the rubbery sound is just gorgeous now this part this is what drives me wild the harmonies here, combined with that sound, is just like a whole other dimension. Notice the rhythm around it. And it's a very rich addition to the content of the track. The track. Feel that pattern. Again, notice the different textures, the different sort of frequency range it's in. Structure is so brilliant, isn't it? Just how the storyline, how, you know, it's all these stems that are repeating, and it's such a rich story.

And now we're going to get all the big stuff coming back. Nice drum buildup. Something else came in there on a lower frequency, and that's with a gnarly sound. a little echo going on there, it comes out, and the kick is back. Nobody does it that way these days. Knocked the lid off again. Whoosh! I love this drum kick, sort of patterning the track ends with a beautiful whoosh. Oh, light up a cigarette after that one. Unbelievable.

I mean, hey, yeah, you know they are both great, but there's that extra content that's sort of almost pyramid-like, sort of climbing, you know, this mystical harmony, sort of where he just adds that extra bit there. That for me is just, you know, that's for for me it pulls on multiple levels, and I again really like the more streamlined sonorities in this one, but you know, hey, the gritty original—it's it's brilliant for sure.

So as I said, the place exploded when I played that one at ZNA. I'm just gonna put a little clip here just so you can see a little bit of the mayhem. I mean, hey, it's a pretty, it's a pretty kicking track, and it is really interesting. I think you know that dropping the speed down sometimes, and if you have a track that builds up in intensity but the BPM is lower, it creates this tension that needs to come out and express. And you know, of course, the musical content has to be there. It's not just—it's never just BPM. It's really all multiple factors simultaneously.

So, so there we go. I'm going to sign off and leave you with both versions of that track.
