Artist: Hallucinogen
Song: Astral Pancakes
Year: 1995

Hey, there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 47 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are well into my second year of being in this movement, the '95 to '96 Season. This is a track that was, in fact, released in August '95. That I first remember hearing in the autumn of '95 by one of my all-time favorite artists. I think one of everybody's all-time favorite artists. This is yet again the great Hallucinogen Simon Posford, and this comes from a dragonfly single that features Astral Pancakes. On the flip side of Fluoro Neuro Sponge, which made it onto his album, Astral Pancakes did not.

You know, I've often thought that a lot of the hallucinogenic tracks—I mean, there were all kinds of single tracks that didn't make it onto albums. There could have been in an album 1.5, I think, of all of the tracks that were on singles but not on the albums, just great, great stuff. And this is one of them. This is one that I just, you know, is one of my all-time favorites. And I actually was in touch with Simon about this one recently. And you know, all of the all of his tracks are coming out on vinyl. The two albums were already just re-released on vinyl, and next, all of the other remaining tracks are coming on the next set. And he was really happy with how this one sounded, and musically as well. And well, I certainly agree.

This is one of my favorites, one that I remember Cooney playing for sure. And I can't remember a hundred percent if he played it at that autumn equinox party in September '95, but I think given the timing and given the style, I think it absolutely would have been played then.

The name Astral Pancakes is kind of an interesting one, and it comes from a story in Robert Anton Wilson's book Cosmic Trigger, which talks about all these this UFO visit that apparently took place in the 1960s when there were lots of UFO visits taking place. When a farmer reported that there was a knock on the door, and there were these two aliens that presented him with a plate of pancakes. I remember Simon telling me the story, and it was like, did he say how the pancakes were, and he said apparently they were pretty good. And I read up on it a little bit, and apparently, yeah, they were just normal pancakes, but had a little extra wheat germ. So there we go. I don't know if they came with maple syrup or not, but there we go. So FBI investigations apparently indicated that this fellow really believed that this is what had happened. So, so there we are.

Whether musically this sounds like Astral Pancakes, I can't say, but musically this is classic peak Hallucinogen, I think. From this time where there was that magical, mystical kind of harmonic, melodic atmosphere that was going on in the music, and I just think it's absolutely beautiful. The sound is really crisp and clear, beautifully layered, beautifully engineered, and there's just a lot to love about this track. So maybe it's time to give it a listen.

All right, so here we go. We are going to listen to Hallucigen's masterpiece, Astral Pancakes. Beautiful. Much. Beautiful, majestic, mysterious opening. Very calm, beautiful synth sound. Just really simple note progression, but really beautiful, and then it's going to lead into this big, beautiful slide. Love that there's these aerated, windy-like sounds that come in as well. And it just builds up. Kind of classic Hallucinogen slide. Love the kick here, really heart- level kind of kick. This slide up is getting louder and more persistent. I love that upper percussive sound that we're going to be hearing a lot of.

And you know there's that rhythm that's really common in these things, right? Where you hear one note there's a rhythm and variation here. This is going to break through to another level. We're waiting for that break to happen, and then it happens. Beautiful, these beautiful sounds. Again, you know, this is like what I've been saying for a long time that there's no instrument that you can really associate with these sounds. It sort of sounds a little bit like something, but not quite.

Now, these upper sounds has a little bit of that Jamaican tin drum kind of thing that I've talked about in some other productions. Just like love the way it opens up that upper frequency, and it has this very upbeat, celebratory kind of quality. And then you have a column answer, while those other little bouncy effects are going on. And now we get that there's a subtle undercurrent happening, it's almost impossible to hear on a small system. And now this is becoming a little bit more complex. And you know, really, this is again some of those sounds and patternings that will sound completely different on a big system than on a small one. As great as they sound on a small system.

Again, the frequency range is increasing here. I know there's all this buildup that's happening until things completely break open into a completely different kind of melodic and atmospheric content on the next beat. I love the way there's this floaty stuff that just offsets this gorgeous, fluid, mystical melody that's got, you know, perfect major-minor intervals happening, and then same notes from that melody as in this kind of broken up chorus effect. And then this very clever break here. Just such a brilliant way to very lightly break the loop and go into another section.

And back to the melody. And back with a melody. Beautiful, hypnotic. You know, it's just really circular, like this closed loop. Really brilliantly conceived. I love the way those intervals play out. Just beautifully balanced, right? That chorus is just enough in the background. Really zone out on this mystical melody here, and then another break.

A completely different kind of section now, right? Devoid of that previous mystical, magical kind of vibe. Just a little bit of that those voices underneath the way this is just increasing here now this lower sound is going to start evolving in a completely different way, right here, and it's going to start grinding up and pushing forward while that upper stuff is still going on. Then some of those same intervals, and again, this has that really intergalactic, cosmic, carnival kind of atmosphere.

Right, it's like the tension is building up and the excitement. Right, really the direction of these motifs is really important, right? Because as they're going up, they're really bringing your mood up as well. And there's another break here, and then those slides up. Listen, how many again? I said it every episode. How many different layers are playing simultaneously? What's interesting is we haven't gone back to that mystical harmony yet it's just there in that one section now there's more of these extra percussive elements just all really building up and getting more and more intense.

And then we kind of cycle back to the space. Again, the different tones, the different frequencies, the different rhythms, different patterns, and now the kick drops out, and we start to head into the conclusion. What was that sound from earlier on in the try? Amazing track, eh?

Um, that I didn't hear as much as I would have liked to hear it. I think by the time I got to London in '96, everybody was just playing the track of the season there. Um, in Tokyo. I definitely heard it a few times. Apparently, it's played a lot more at retro parties in Europe these days than a lot of his other tracks. So it is still a really popular one, and deservedly so.

I do find it interesting that you know that beautiful mystical melody, which comes if you know a few minutes in, it just really appears in that section, and then that's it. You've Got all these other sort of wild, sort of sounds building up, and then that's the sort of stuff that then evolves later on. But again, we have the incredible precision of engineering, the creativity of the sounds, the different textures, the otherworldly kind of sounds, and a blend of atmospheres and moods.

And this is something I've referred to fairly recently, but a few times. That there's more than one mood or emotion, and sometimes conflicting ones simultaneously. So it's a little, you know, broody and mystical, but it's also upbeat. But there's a little bit of darkness, but also some light, and so all of these things are going on simultaneously. And I think this is where this music becomes such a great avenue, an expression of humanity and beyond spirituality, on the dance floor. That it's not just one mood that you're expressing; you're celebrating this range of moods, and that's partly, I think, the harmonics. I think it's also the different frequencies, the different rhythms. I think it's just the simultaneity of all of it, which you know really can be that psychedelic frame of mind. Here we are having, you know, experiencing what it is that we're experiencing now, and everything's going off all at once. But you know, this is what we're hearing. This is what we're feeling right now.

So just a masterpiece of a track. It was not commonly on CD, and I'm just trying to think offhand. I didn't research beforehand. I think there was one compilation it was on, but it's not, you know, not the most common track of his to have circulated. And I'm glad that it's still as popular as it is because it's a doozy.

So there we go, Astral Pancakes. By the way, the Robert Anton Wilson story was called Cosmic Pancakes, and it was referred to there as that. And Simon liked the word Astral better than Cosmic, so that's why he chose Astral Pancakes. So there we are. Absolutely incredible track by Hallucinogen Simon Posford. I will sign off here to leave you with the entire track.
