Artist: Koxbox
Song: Fuel On
Year: 1995

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 49 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are probably nearing the end of my 95-96 Selections from roughly September '95 through to the summer of '96. It's just been kind of working out that about half of the year of episodes, about 25, 26 episodes, focused on each year. We'll see how this continues. So we're approaching our one-year anniversary of this series, and it's going to get a little bit hard actually with choosing all of the top tracks from every year. There's really there's more than twenty five great tracks in every season, and so anyway, we'll see how this program evolves. But I'm really delighted as this is the last episode of 2023, and we started up in January 2023. We're We're plugging away over here and fueling on, which is actually pretty much the title of the track that we're looking at today.

Beautiful track from this TIP compilation that came out in early 1996. Those of you who have commented on my memory will possibly be surprised that when I looked up the release date just now, I was surprised to find it was February '96 because I actually thought it was a few months later. But we're looking at Koxbox Fuel On. So Koxbox at this time was still the three members of Frank E (Frank Kiehn Madsen), Ian Ion, and Peter Candy. Peter, who left the group at some point as well, but they did perform. The three members performed the summer after this, so summer of '96 at Burning Man. Back when Burning Man was a very small thing, but it was the three members.

And goodness me, this track is really something. So remember that their album, first Koxbox album, which is really one of the very first artist albums in this scene, we can look at it in sequence. Really, as Juno Reactor's Transmissions, then Koxbox Forever After on Harthouse, and then a Hallucinogen Twisted. Pretty much, that's the order that I recall. I think Total Eclipse On Blue Room came out after that. Those were all in '95, but here we are in February '96, and we've got Koxbox, Fuel On, on TIP.

Now, by the autumn of '96, the tracks that they produced on TIP would be under the name Psychopod, and this is similar to what we were looking at last time, and at other times, where projects who were signed exclusively to a certain label would release on other labels under different project names. So we have Prana as Taiyo as early as '94, and then we have Pleiadians for Etnica, and here Koxbox would, Like Etnica, be signed to Blue Room, and release some brilliant, brilliant stuff there. So, starting in the compilation after this, we have Koxbox appearing under the name Psychopod. Some amazing stuff there.

But right now, we're going to look at this amazing beauty. Now, this is another one where it was Gio Makyo, the ambient master, who still knew and loved great kicking music, who told me that I had to run, not walk, to the Cisco Techno shop in Shibuya in Tokyo to get this new TIP compilation. So the previous one had just come out in October of '95, and then this one would have been early. It's apparently, according to Discogs, February '96. Now I thought I had just come back from a trip, and it was similar to when I came back from India. And Gio Makyo told me to get First Flight, so it might have been that I came back from a trip in Thailand. I used to have occasional holidays there, so in any case, I remember him going on about a few tracks on here. And again, I don't know how I'm going to wrap it up this season in the next three episode when there's so many great ones here. But I needed to include Koxbox, and I needed to include this track because it really was a major, major track for quite a while. Really fantastic energy, musical content, and that unbelievable Koxbox creativity.

So I don't really know what else to say about this. Before we start listening, there's going to be plenty to say while we're listening, because there is a whole lot going on in terms of the musical content, in terms of the fantastic, creative meandering storyline that is just so different from the really boxed-in structures that we tend to find with the music nowadays. So, how about we just get started and listening, listen to Koxbox's masterpiece, "Fuel On."

Beautiful opening with all these undulating sort of things over here, and these textured washes. This build up here, and now this really bouncy, buoyant bass kick. Start bouncing. It's that bouncing, energizing bassline, and then that beautiful jump, that octave jump that I think Stimuli was the first one to do that, and that was really a thing there. And that textured whoosh going while there's this incredibly catchy riff. What a riff! The kick, super uplifting. Really like carnival music from another dimension. I love the way that riff has a part that goes up and then it comes down. Goes up, does a little thing. Kick comes again and then it really is beautifully done.

This what. And this re- what a break! And... I mean, really otherworldly, I mean, just all these textures, really wild and wacky harmonies and riffs. Goes up an octave there. Get a little bit atonal here. Those are some sounds we're gonna hear in later Koxbox productions in a big way. Let's just bounce. Just wait. Some of this bounce, just wait, seems to get a bit closer, and then this, a little key change and we're in this whole other environment now, completely different setting, but we still have that bounce going on, and then that slide here, and then we come back to this.

Love what they do with those drums all the time, and you know how some of these riffs continue while all this other stuff changes to give it a different perspective. Just the wacky harmony and otherworldly sounds. Now we're gonna get this beautiful, beautiful part here. And it's very faint here, and the next round it's going to be a little more pronounced, but just that kind of one note. Now it's going to be more audible. So you get that sort of one note expression while there's all this other wacky stuff going on.

Just this amazing build up, and then then we have some different instrumentation here to this sound, this riff rather that we've heard before. Comes in on another register there. Just that repetition completely zones you out. Like how many times? It's like, how many times have you been through this? There's that whoosh, really textured slide. How much is going on? There's that one-note thing. And a little break while there's... This stuff just continues. Getting the kicks. Is that Octasweep? Not complete.

Really, such a buoyant, uplifting atmosphere with the sounds that are chosen and the upward sort of rhythmic bounce, but there's still so much completely otherworldly, broody, wild stuff going on. Now we've got something completely different, and this is what's going to start coming right a year or so later with Stratosfear and Stratosfearless, another really completely out there music that Koxbox will be producing. It's just a little taste of that darker language here. Just playing with all these notes in the chord. Great broken up rhythm. Now it gets doubled up, so we have it happening on an octave with two different instruments.

I mean, really, if this is played at the right time, it can get become. This I see as a really great morning track where it's really celebratory and otherworldly, like woken up in this other dimension. Great at nighttime too, but again, it's that cosmic carnival kind of vibe here that's really interesting. Those wacky zaps happening. Now we get a very interesting riff here. We get almost, almost jazzy kind of riff happening here. Just another upper voice and that lower one interplay. Oh, there's that textured whoosh happening. Now that comes in on another octave. It's on another octave again.

Now things start pulling away. Okay, that was like one of the hardest ones to speak during, because there are so many different things happening simultaneously, and it's like kind of impossible without stopping the music and pointing out all of the different things that are going on. I mean, just the level of complexity here is off the charts. A number of different riffs, what they're doing harmonically, texturally, in terms of the mood, it's really astounding.

Again, it's kind of interesting. We're hearing, you know, looking and listening back, knowing what's coming, knowing the language of Psychopod and, in a sense, Psychopod and Dreampod that would show up on the Phosphorescent compilation after this one. Knowing what's coming with Too Pure, but especially with Stratosfear and Stratosfearless on Blue Room, those productions, and we're starting to hear some of the seeds of some of those different linguistic, musically linguistic expressions that Koxbox would bring.

What's interesting here, I think, compared to the first album, is the the sonic framework is a little more granular. Like it's not as polished in the sense of the sonorities aren't as glass-like or crystalline, but there's a little bit of sort of a throaty, gnarly edge to it. But the engineering is still like off the charts, so it's this really interesting balance, similar to some of what we heard with Infinity Project tracks, where there would be this sort of gnarly, edgy kind of thing, but the the actual engineering is really incredibly refined and musically as well.

It's not just simple, you know, one or two note melodies or chords. I mean, there's some major complexity going on, and major and minor. There's some of the intervals that's going on there. We have a perfect fifth that's in there, but also again minor second, minor third, and there's all kinds of bouncing around that's going on. The way that riff sort of goes up and then goes down, so it's like its own call and answer. That sort of like snake-like rhythmic thing that's going on, or sort of sliding through. The way the the upper percussion will sort of lead to all these buildups. Incredible meandering storyline of just next level complexity, and it all somehow pulls together.

Just a major, major masterpiece, and it was it was a major track at the time, definitely. And Blue Room was working on releasing the Koxbox Live that took place that summer in '96. And I remember meeting someone in '97 who was working on the project, and he said that Fuel On was kind of like the anthem for for the project, which unfortunately never happened, I think it was about—if I recall—about 20 test pressings were made, and then for whatever reason, it wasn't released. I got a DAT copy from a really good source. It's fantastic stuff. I think there's bits and bobs of it that have come out, and there's video of it, and you can see there's a whole like five or ten people there, I mean, it's just kind of these things that were legendary, and then how they looked at the time might have looked a little less legendary, but it was legendary. It was groundbreaking that these guys showed up in the desert with these synthesizers and did this live set, and that they produced this unbelievable music.

So, if this was released in February '96, this means this was produced at some point in '95. Music, really, that's so beyond. Really, a lot of what's coming out nowadays, when you listen to the mainstream, just absolutely masterful music making from Frank E, Ian and Peter.

Those of you who are following retro stuff may have seen the announcement that's happened in the last little while that Frank E and Ian will be joining forces for a Koxbox and Psychopod live at ZNA in the summer of 2024. They've got all the original computerized data and are going to be reworking everything, and it's going to be something. I have two unbelievable musical minds.

We will be exploring some of Ian's other work with The Overlords in the future as well. So that was a bit of a meandering, meandering presentation that goes with that incredible meandering track as well. So, I will sign off here and leave you with the whole track.
