Artist: The Overlords
Song: Naked People (Full Moon In Disco Valley Mix)
Year: 1995

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 50 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share one of my favorite tracks in each episode from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. This is the first episode of 2024. It is actually our one-year anniversary since I took a couple of weeks off when I was traveling in Europe last summer. Our first episode was January sixth last year. I've moved from Fridays to Thursdays now, so we're just a couple of days off. We're not quite at a year's worth of episodes, but hey, we're getting there. I really appreciate everybody's enthusiasm for these episodes and everyone who tunes in to watch the streams live and have a chat, and I'm going to do a couple more episodes on tracks from the '95-'96 season, my second year in the scene.

As I've stated before, it's pretty hard to decide what to feature because there's just so many tracks that I love, so many by the same artists, and I'm really wanting to reach out and you know expand the scope and include everyone. So in that sense, this one is definitely fits in the '95-'96 season. This track appeared on a compilation that came out in October '95. I remember when this one was issued. I remember hearing it. I've played it out, as have others at the same festival. I remember on one occasion hearing it three times over the course of a seven-day festival in the last few years, and it's a doozy.

This is Naked People, the Full Moon In Disco Valley Mix. If I've got it correct, done by Martin Freeland, A.K.A. Man With No Name. For me, it's just Naked People, MWNN remix. Of course, Martin Freeland, the master Man With No Name, who released this as the opening track on the Transient Two compilation, second compilation on the Transient label, that was compiled by Disco Volante, which is incidentally a name that appears in a 1960s James Bond movie.

But The Overlords actually has a tie into last week's episode of Koxbox because this was an early EBM Belgian New Beat project that included among others Ian Ion, who became a key member of Coxbox and Psychopod. They wrote some pretty important early tracks that I'll sort of go back to do because they weren't ones that I actually got my hands on at that period, but I became more aware of them a little bit later. So we'll see. I might actually wrap up with them in this season since I think that actually might be when I heard them.

But this particular remix is fascinating. Now I didn't get any details from the artists on this one, but I did a little bit of scanning and found the original. And I mean, it's a number with vocals. The Overlords did some pretty experimental, cool stuff, and they released their first tunes, I believe, in the late '80s. So they're pretty cutting edge, leading edge with all of this stuff, and they had an album that included Naked People, their version, the vocal, and Martin did his incredible, incredible remix of it. I guess at some point in '95, because it was released, might have been in late '94, but it was released in, as I said, October '95. And this is a doozy. Incredible engineering, incredible musical content, along with some of the trademark elements that I think make goa tracks just so goa, just so great. So lots for me to point out as we're listening. So I think we might as well just get started and do that.

Got here, the Man With No Name Full Moon In Disco Valley Mix of The Overlords, Naked People. So can't tell if that's supposed to be people or just atmospheric noise. And then, I mean, this is kind of dramatic slash melodramatic. It's almost a little bit, possibly tongue in cheek, but it works. And there's some howling people or wolves or whatever. Definitely full moon atmosphere. I love this slow little bit where the riff starts getting more and more revealed. Some cool little gurgling going on there. Love that sound, and we want to be hearing more sounds like that. Classic, Man With No Name, amazing rhythm. And you get that brought down an octave or so lower. We get that rhythmic element added, and then get that the hi-hats come in, and then just there's that wonderful oscillation. You can hear where Psychaos got his kind of bouncing back and forth. He revered Man With No Name justly.

Actually, the version we're listening to I got off of a DAT, that Joti had compiled in the nineties. Really good sound. Then get this, octave leap, right? Just like we had in Fuel On and in Stimuli. This really adds this uplifting atmosphere. That riff again. It's uplifting, but it's still probing, right? There's still something insistent about it. So this kind of celestial chorus, beautiful intervals, beautiful melody, beautiful fluid line. You know, again, it sounds a little bit like some earthly instrument, maybe a little pan flutey, but it's also you know aerated and synthesized to the point that it's not like a specific sound we can recognize.

Interesting little vocal sample. And then got get a perfect fifth in there, as long as as well as a minor second and minor third. So we get that uplifting, but also slightly angsty quality. And then, I mean, everybody's just going for it when you when you play this. Super uplifting. Passion. Some great zappy sounds. You know, it's just this wonderful loop, and that breaks out, right? But you just get this riff that's sort of circular and that repeats, and it just really trances you out. But uplifting, yeah. Little break, and then just there's that insistence as well with that rhythmic element that just really makes a big difference, and then again leading into that beautiful aerated celestial chorus.

So again, let's again, listen to all the elements that are going on. Right, we have that smooth melody with the other stuff punctuating it. Key change, and back to regular keys. Just a slight shift there. Notice the registers, right? How much is going on? Where this kind of throaty lower bounce that's in here—a squelcher of an Infinity Project kind of style. Let me get that. It'll sync in conjunction with the voice. Revoiced. That rough. Like that riff with the percussion pulled out and then it comes back in blasting I'm just going to go up an octave see you next time.

You know, it's the rhythm and the note combination that's just, it's infectious. Get those spacey whooshes in there. One, two, three, four. I'm taking it up. It's just brilliant. I mean, this is such a catchy riff, and you can just get into this beautiful hypnotic loop with it. Percussion again. Things start to unwind here. Unwind here. Nice little rhythmic element, man. Classic. Classic.

Now that one was slightly mixed on the Transient release, so I'm glad I got my hands. Thank you, Joti, on that DAT that I believe he put together around was in '95. Also included Angelic Particles and another few classics from that time. That sound is really pumping. Something, you know, Martin Freeland was, still is, a master with engineering. His stuff still sounds phenomenal, and was always on the leading edge in terms of sonic framework.

But musically too, we have a number of signature Martin Freeland Man With No Name elements here. But I think also just the real classic elements of goa of the time, you know, catchy riff, a hummable tune, something with major minor intervals. I mean, perfect fifth is kind of both, but you know, we have that fifth and then that minor third and the minor second. So those real, you know, that oscillation between that more introspective minor key and that more uplifting major key, and just so many different things going on.

Shortest track; it's under seven minutes. Plenty going on, and again, the brilliant storylines. Right, you don't have any of these newfangled breaks where some completely new content comes in during a break to sort of like have this annoying little rest, and then there's this buildup that doesn't go anywhere. Here, you know, the percussion drops out while some other riffs are continuing. Some of the stuff that's already been going on, and we might hear something that we heard before, or it's a variation on something that we've heard before. So there's some logic to the breakdown, and then it builds up, and then right things build up, the the the drums build up, then there's an actual break, and because it's done with actual instruments, you know the the fade, the build up, and the fade of those instruments is actually organic and not kind of I don't know deadbeat. Seems kind of like a wilted flower a lot of the time in newer tracks. The build ups just aren't really build-ups.

So there we go. Absolutely beautiful, beautiful track. I will sign off here and leave you with the full version of the track without me talking over it.
