Artist: Transwave
Song: Zero Density
Year: 1995

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 51 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are close to wrapping up my second year in the scene, 95 to 96, so September 95 through to the summer of 96. Now there's no way I'm going to get through all of my favorite tracks from this period. I mean, this is the 25th, and there's so many other ones that I can think that I would like to feature. So I don't know how I'm going to get through everything that needs to be done. I might sort of just come back randomly and start doing some favorite ones from other periods, but I would like us to move on to ninety six, ninety seven soon, because goodness me, there's a whole lot from this pivotal time, from all of these pivotal eras. You know, all of these years, there were some really, really key tracks that sort of are part of the the wave of development of this music and this movement.

Now this project I covered before, and this is though this is part of their evolution as well. So this is from their first full-length official album, as opposed to what was termed an EP, which was basically an album given the length of it, with the track that we featured earlier. And so this is Transwave from their iconic Transwave from their iconic album Helium on Matsuri, which I still remember getting when I walked into that fabled Cisco Techno shop in Shibuya in Tokyo, where I got my first CD and where I just always went shopping. There were several other stores that I went to, but that was the one. And I just remember looking down, seeing this artwork, and I was like, "Oh yeah, that's definitely something." And sure enough, and of course, it was on Matsuri, which I knew because they had released, you know, the first album that they did was for, you know, the Prana album, which I also haven't gotten to yet, and probably have to. But I mean, you know, the graphics is you know from Organix this great trio of three Japanese artists. I mean, you know, I knew them very well as well, living in Tokyo at the time. So cutting edge, and the music as well, so cutting edge.

So the review, so everybody should know that Transwave is that French duo of Christof Drouillet and Frédéric Holyszewski, popularly known as Dado. Christof is no longer active in the scene, but Dado most certainly is. And I told a story last time, which is more relevant here because it really relates to this music. And it's a story of when Tsuyoshi was in Israel, hanging out with Astral Projection and one or several members of Total Eclipse, and everybody was playing each other's new music for each other. And Tsuyoshi puts on a track from Transwave and another and another, and everybody's just completely gobsmacked. And basically, it was like nobody had anything that could compete with it. And that's how I feel about this album and the track that I've chosen today, which is probably not everyone's number one track on here, but it's clear for me why I chose this, and it's because everything is just so different, and this is what it is that we loved about the music back then, that each track was different. Each project was different from others. There was a unique sound signature. There were, you know, there was a range of styles. Quite often, within that band's signature, and that is definitely the case here.

Transwave was really starting to, you know, from that Step 2 House that we heard, you know, that amazing track that we did last time, and into this album, we've you know there's been this quantum leap of production style, but also the development of a signature. And yet there are so many different styles and signatures in here, and this is absolutely what I love about this album. And I think some tracks have perhaps been a little bit overlooked, and I think the one that I'm playing today is one of them, you know. I'd consider doing My Dear Medical Assurance because I actually remember when Tsuyoshi played in the second time I heard Siochi played in Tokyo at Spiral, this massive venue in the Roppongi district of Tokyo. It was an Odyssey party, and I remember sort of going up near the DJ booth, early on in his set, and I remember hearing these laser-like sounds, these sort of like kind of sounds. And then later, when I got this track, this this album, I recognized those sounds from that second track on the album, My Dear Medical Assurance. So I considered doing that, but I wanted to focus on something that I think is a little bit different. That's going to be track. What is it? Five on here. Zero Density.

Uh, now there's a whole lot of different sounds that Transwave has that I think really stands them apart from a lot of other projects. And this track highlights a number of them. And that's why I wanted to play it. It some of their music is just not as easy to mix into others because that sound signature is so different. And you know that's something I've named before about, for example, Juno Reactor, right? I mean, when the style is so unique, how do you blend? And that's where we we start looking at Goa as being really quite different from the standard, you know, DJ style of mixing where everything should go completely smoothly into another track. I mean, yes, there is a smoothness, but there's also where you're putting these different kinds of foods together on a plate, and there's contrast, right? So you got your carbohydrates, you got your vegetables and different kinds of vegetables, and you got your proteins, and you know they're they are going to blend, but it doesn't mean that they're that similar or they're part of the same group. It's a complementary group, and Transwave is a really complementary group. So let's put on what I think is an absolutely blinding and underappreciated track, Zero Density by Transwave.

So notice this beautiful arpeggio. Goes through some note changes there. That's bassline. Goes up and then it goes down. Up a fifth and then down a second. So we have these two different harmonic patterns going on simultaneously, and then this is a kick. It's just it's pretty high for a kick, right? It's right in the heart chakra. Total Eclipse used to do this at times as well. See how clear those textures are. And those hi hats. Again, not so much going on, but there's enough happening in each voice, and the layering is just beautiful. Right, so you start trancing out, and then notice how those hi hats came in to just add a little bit of variety. There's going to be this little chord change going on throughout. It just adds this beautiful tension, just this evolution of these arpeggios. It's basically just chords that are going through all this phasing. It's just marvelous. That pause and then voices. So sign of humanity. Sure, all that electronic stuff. Then that is. Then, notice how it sounds more synthesized, right? You've got it echoed. So we've got the computers and humans working together. Then we have those note changes. Got those drum rolls. Love those drum rolls. There's this kind of sheet metal sound to what Transwave is producing in tracks like this. That's really unique. You know, the frequency level of the track seems to be on the higher side, right? So it's not as boomy a bass. Same with the synth sounds. It's really elegant and refined. It's just really like polished crystal in terms of the synth sounds and the frequency that it's on. It's just these harmonic shifts and notes expressing in certain patterns with different sounds. We come back to that opening pattern. Beautiful aerated quality to it, right? Really, I mean Zero Density. What a perfect track name for this really sounds like it's extremely floaty.

The kick has dropped out. It starts coming in again. I'm going to let her growl when we hear it so much. You get that familiar growl that we hear in so much of this music that really gives that now we've got something that's in that much you know lower register so it's starting to fill out the space. It's just that slide is very sensual here. Who does that? That's really, like, first time I've ever heard anything like that. Notice how that upper frequency is pushing down here? Ah, now this whole other ceiling lifts. This is you know again that kind of celebratory, uplifting kind of vibe, but it's also got a slight tinge of anguish with the chords that they're using. It's like the joy of. Again, that aerated sheet metal kind of sound. Those upper sounds, just incredible.

Now, until now, it's actually been fairly restrained, and you know it's about two thirds of the way through. There's going to be this big, beautiful shift right here, and that sheet metal, sort of gassy, aerated, kind of foggy sound. Wait, wait for. Stay up. Wait for it. Seems to be dying down. When you least expect it. And just everything just completely breaks loose. The synth sound, the notes that are being played here, and that uplifting energy that's got just, again, that tinge of some other emotions in there. Notice how, again, those hi-hats really bounce off in that higher register. And now we get that happening on a higher level. So now there's a lot more tension. Now there's this kind of cross-hatching that I've talked about before, it's really like these beautiful little raindrops, this kind of texture of fabric coming down. Notice the rhythm as well at this point. Totally hypnotic, isn't it? Let me start. Let me start pulling back. About 40 seconds left. Just have to get into those arpeggios and that grinding.

At this point, the DJ has been mixing into other tracks. Wow, I mean, really, there's nothing like that out there, right? You can instantly, if you if you know this music, you can instantly recognize that that's Transwave or somebody pretending to be Transwave. We talked about last time. Dado had talked about how he was trying to sound like Total Eclipse, and that was the effect that he was able to get in in a track. But but you know, it was it was their own sound, and this is just so completely their own sound. You know, there's a kind of flatness that works and creates a certain impression. So it's like you know, some of the tracks have more oomph and they have more spaciousness, and that can sound like a criticism, and it's absolutely not. That here there's this kind of like this wall of sound, and it's there's this almost like sheet metal kind of quality to it. And what I'd often experience listening to some of their music on a big system, you know, in a party atmosphere, was it was really like voices coming out of tinfoil and sort of this kind of material. It's hard to explain, but I mean, it's really a very unique sound. And whether they were at this point or not trying to sound like anybody else, I mean, they sound like themselves, and it sounds like something completely otherworldly and inevitable, as far as I'm concerned.

So, you know, a lot of tracks on here, I think, got a lot more play. You know, My Dear Medical Assurance, as I named The Rezwalker, most definitely. Helium, a tough one, because it's so much slower. I played that before, actually, first time I ever played for people in someone's living room, and that was a key turning point. Trashish got heaps of play, but this is again—it's really difficult in a sense because it's so unique. I did play this in 2022 in Ottawa, and yeah, there's a there's a way I think this is a kind of a dawn, kind of, you know, as the light is starting to break, kind of track. There's a bit, you know, great in the afternoon, great in the daylight, but it's just unique. And again, this is what drew us to the scene: is the fact that there's creative, beautiful music, and everything about this track for me is creative and beautiful, and certainly mind-expanding. So there we go. I will sign off here and leave you with the complete track.
