Artist: Infernal Machine
Song: The Loin King
Year: 1996

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 53 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And with this episode, we are officially moving into the second year of episodes, and moving into my third year in this scene. So the first 26 episodes focused on tracks that I had come across in the 94-95 season, my first year exposed to this musical art form, and the second 26 episodes, so from I guess 27 to 52, we looked at tracks that I first came across in '95 to '96 thereabouts, roughly. Now we are starting off this '96 season, which was a pivotal time for the scene and also for me.

I left Japan in July '96 to spend a few weeks in Canada, and then at the beginning of September 96, I moved to London to be closer to Ground Zero of the what I thought was going to be Ground Zero of the musical production and party side of this scene. More on all of that possibly today, but definitely in future episodes.

So, so the track that I'm featuring today has a lot of backstory because it relates to a whole event, and there's a whole lot of story here. So I've been hearing feedback from folks saying they love stories. Well, there's multiple stories that will sort of tie in the whole context of this particular one, and I'm quite excited to share this. So I've been waiting for a while for this one because I wanted to present it in context.

So I originally grew up in Montreal, but by the time I left Japan in '96, my immediate family had moved from there. So my sister was living in Vancouver. So when I left Japan, I came to spend some time in Vancouver, and I was going to fly to London, but I thought I would fly through Montreal, visit friends and relatives there, before moving to London, right? Because it was en route, so to speak.

So Back in the day before cell phones, you would make arrangements to meet people or do something, and if there was a challenge with people meeting up on time or being there, you know, you couldn't just text them or call them because you were in the place where you're supposed to meet. So I was supposed to meet a friend of mine, uh, in Montreal one or two days before my flight to London, and he didn't show up, and I was just sort of hanging around in the area, and I was curious, you know, and went to a payphone. We used to have payphones, you know, like those booths that Superman would change in, and you know, put in a quarter and dial the number and phoned his home to see, hey, is he there? You know, what's happening? Nobody there. So I didn't know what was happening.

So I was in this area of Town where we were supposed to meet, and there was a record store there. So I went into the record store, and came across this flyer for Return to the Source in New York. And I'm like, you gotta be kidding me! Like, when is this? This is in September. When was it going to be taking place? September 21st, Happy Solstice. Um, uh, is it equinox or solstice? It's equinox.

Uh, so I was gonna be, you know, I'm on the same continent in the same time zone in Montreal, and like three weeks later, there's gonna be this party, but I'm gonna be in London, where I think all the great stuff's happening. And here is this party, which you know I knew of Return to the Source because of the CDs, and I'd heard about the events, and so here is this party.

Look, first time in the USA. We want to take a look at this DJ list: psychedelic, spiritual, trance masters. They were called deck wizards. Siochi, Mark Allen, Hallucinogen, Doof, Transwave, Green Nuns of the Revolution, and then live percussion with Chris Decker from Medicine Drum.

And I just saw this, and I was like, "You've got to be kidding me!" You know, because I had that was my second summer in Canada, where I observed this incredible dearth, complete absence of the Goa sound, you know. And went to a few club things, met some people, and I was just like, "Is this really what you guys are listening to? Come on!" And so, you know, I was moving to London to get close to stuff, and then all of a sudden, this event is happening on my continent, and I was just like, I can't believe this. What am I gonna do?

So of course, I took this flyer, and when I got to London a couple of days later, you know, I continued thinking about it, and I decided that I would fly to New York for this party. So Flights were, you know, not that inexpensive at the time. I was surprised how reasonable it was, and, you know, I mean, now, you know, the thought of like I'm just going to fly overseas for this party. Um, I wasn't the only one.

So, but yeah, I did that. I called up a friend of mine who, from Japan, who was then studying at university in Florida. He was a big Trans party guy, and told him about it. So he decided to fly up from Florida to come to this party as well. So it was, you know, there was no Facebook messaging, there was no texting. It was, you know, a lot more logistical arrangements. He gave me the phone number of his friend in New York so that I could contact him when it was there. And yada yada. It was, anyway. It was a whole thing.

So we all met up, went to this science museum, Liberty Science Center. Okay, so I mean, try to imagine that you're going to a psychedelic trance, you know, Goa style party in a science museum. Is this not what we have all dreamed of? Yes, it was. It was absolutely Astounding.

The Goa area was in a sort of it was all carpeted. There was water fountains. It was all like you know nice backlighting. I mean, it was it was fairly well lit. And you know there was this four story atrium. So basically, you were you know you could see the other floors sort of went around this whole central dance area. So it was just like this super high ceiling and oh my goodness, it was absolutely jaw dropping.

Now, the Americans who were there were all used to, you know, more breakbeedy kind of breakdance kind, you know, sort of stuff, and they were all you know in circles where you know one person would like dance in the middle of the circle and everybody be Watching and I was there in my fluoro stuff and I would just like dance right through the circle and you know let's all just be was really on the mission of everybody's having their own story and you know we're engaging with each other but anyway it was pretty wild

So I got there when I missed the first that I guess between I think it was between eleven and twelve so I think it was eleven to Six in the morning, so I'm pretty sure it ended right at six. When it would have been, the first part would have been Chris Decker. Then there was Green Nuns, so I came in for that. Recognized them and the tunes.

After that, just going to look at the lineup here and get my reminder. But it's not the order that they played in here. So after Green Nuns was Transwave. Wave. Then there was Doof. After Doof was Hallucinogen. Then was Mark Allen, and then was Toshi. They only had one hour each.

Now I am kind of not a big proponent of this. What's going on now with this tendency towards these one-hour sets and just Packing in these, you know, a gazillion DJs and everybody not really having a chance to tell a story, but in this case, there was something different that was happening. This was an exposure to the very best that the scene had to offer. In a way, of course, there's other great artists, but you know, this kind of poof, you know, everybody comes in and just blasts for an Hour and then more and then more and then more. It really worked.

So there's a lot that I remember from this party. Surprisingly, but also not surprisingly, what I recall specifically was Transwave was playing some of their new album, which had not yet come out. So it was stuff that I didn't recognize. Nick Doof dancing around with his shirt off, was and very sweaty, and you know it was hilarious. And then Simon was there with his blue dragonfly shirt, even though Twisted Records has that was just starting out.

And I remember a bunch. We're gonna we're gonna be hearing some of the tracks that I remember from this party. This was the first time that I heard Gamma Goblins, and that I heard the Snarling Black Mabel remix. That I could recognize, I was like, wait a second, I don't recognize this version.

Then there was, I remember in Mark Allen's set. So he was the second to last set, and he played that track with a sample that I played at CNA in 2022. The Real question now is, can we make it back to Earth? By Satori, and the place exploded with them.

So all of this is building up, right? I mean, the energy is just ramping up with each one, and then Sioshi is on. I'm getting goosebumps right now, and then Sioshi comes on, and he just drops all this stuff. Certainly, I've never heard, and just Blows the lid off the place. All stuff that I would come to recognize in subsequent weeks as they would come to be released.

So X1 by Process, Psychopod by Psychopod, Boundless by Prana. You know, I would retroactively say, "Oh, now I remember that." So I remember, especially, I remember those melting sounds from the Psychopod track coming in near the end,

And then near the end of the party, I'm there with my camera different times, and I I had two cameras. I had a 3D camera, which was this great Japanese thing where it would take three different photos, and then you could get them developed and superimposed one over the other. And so, um, I've got some very cool photos from there.

Uh, and then I also had my regular camera, and I Happened to have my regular camera and just be in the right place when Simon Posford goes up to Toshi with a DAT and offers him a track that he hadn't played ever, that he had written before the set, and before the party for the party that hadn't included in his party. It was untitled, just said "Return to the Source" on the DAT,

And I got this photo of them lining up the track, which is just for me it looks kind of historical. I mean, it was really quite a moment. And he puts on the track that would later be known as The Loin King, and that's the track that ended the party.

And I'm getting emotional. I mean, it was really something. I mean, really, it was the impression to see North Americans getting it and being completely blown, having everything blown open, and the cheers afterwards. I mean, it was really something. And just the sounds, you know.

So when we listen to it, you know, imagine this ending a party and ending, you know, the first experience that people have had, and having had that whole progression, it was astounding.

So this track would later come to be issued as a release by the Infernal Machine. And the Infernal Machine was a project, unfortunately, fairly short-lived, with Dick Trevor and Simon Bosworth. So Dick from the Green Nuns and Simon, and the flip side of it was the Loin Sleeves, which you know was definitely the two of them, which I first heard at a Matsuri party. I'll be talking about it then in October of '96.

But I guess you know they wanted to put out that one track that Simon And Dick had done, and they want to put this other track out, so they put this on the flip side. Now, when I checked in with Simon just before filming this, he thought that he had done this with Dick, but I remember him telling me previously that it was a solo one.

And when you look at the label, it very specifically says that this track is with Walter Ego. So Walter Ego was Simon's alter ego, and Muttley is added to the credits for the other side. Muttley was a cartoon character, an alter ego for Dick. So this is a solo track.

So technically, in a way, it's a Hallucinogen track because it's a Simon solo. We should add also that going to be guessing now because I have to remember, but I'm pretty sure it's Jiggle of the Sphinx That Simon wrote with Dick, also. So there is a track on a second Hallucinogen album, on *The Lone Deranger*, which Simon wrote with Dick. That's the one that's coming to me right now. I think it is that one. But apologies if it's not. I'll check after filming.

And so this is basically a Hallucinogen track, but you know it's um it's officially called Infernal Machine, so there we go.

And The Loin King, you know, this was just a year or two after the Lion King movie was out. Loining is kind of a British slang and perhaps other slang for you know going and you know checking out girls or trying to get girls. So you know, not necessarily Related to the musical content, but a fun title as we often get with Maestro Osford.

So, with all of that intro, right? There's all of this background. I just want you know, you know, as you're listening, you can maybe imagine, you know, that this is like the crowning, the apex of this unbelievable party that was the introduction to New York City of This unbelievable music.

Let's listen now to the Infernal Machine, A.K.A. the Lucid Gem. In this case, the Lion King. Beautiful deep voice. Notice the rhythmic stuff after it. And then with the next cycle of eight bars, great whoosh, beautiful figuration. Notice the counterpoint with that other part I'm saying.

Then, okay, so that beautiful upper riff. Listen to that. The counterpoint with that in the bassline. Minor third in the bass line, and then these whooshes, just razor sharp. Absolutely amazing.

Notice this other upper voice that's modulating. So there's the notes, what's going on, and then that rhythm. Notice those two rhythms going together. It's just like this drive for this track is just coming.

And so you know, no actual clear melody yet, right? Just harmonic stuff going on. It had beautiful phasing. What's going on with that beautiful phasing that's going on?

So now we get an extra rhythmic layer happening. This is classic Eleusinogen stuff. And the tone of that's changed somewhat right now.

And then, with that bush... These notes are going to be important because you know there's going to be a riff that comes in later. It's all based on this. Again, no major minor. It's a winning formula.

Just listen to the complexity, the rhythm. I'll shut up a little bit so you can actually hear it. Oh no, something else. And just beautiful balance, there's tons of layers going on.

And then there's this little pause, and then... Right, a lot of the stuff pulls back, so we just have a little bit of it, right? So it helps to build up tension. And those whooshes! As I've been saying, we need more of those.

Now notice the movement up and down with these black pieces over here. It's just these four notes. And the optimism, the enthusiasm, the celebratory, exclamatory nature of this. Just now, everything fits together so perfectly. Perfectly.

So again, imagine this is the end of this unbelievable party where you're first exposed to this music and science music in New York, and this is just echoing through the hall and outdoors. I mean, just imagine this under the stars, right? Just anywhere under this sort of epic sort of poly now with this.

Uh all right so by this time it's been going on so many times that they're just in this hypnotic loop and then the cake drops out. Sometimes it can just in this hypnotic loop and then the kick drops out.

And then this ending. Endless ending. Right back at the cheers. I mean, really, off the charts, and everybody was yelling out Sushi's name, and it was, you know, of course, Americanized Sushi, Sushi.

Everybody's yelling out his name, but wasn't his track? And this is the challenge with the whole nature of DJing, in a way, right? Anyone who's up there as a DJ Owes a lot of what they're doing. Let's face it, to the musical producers.

So, you know, I think that every time I play, you know, right. I'm glad people are enjoying this, but we're all the musicians who put all of this together. That I would just not be up there if it weren't for that.

So, yeah, I was just really I was observing that because I saw the setup happen, and saw you know that Simon had presented him with that data that they lined it up together and everything. And this is sort of the invisible nature of what happens.

Just like for that party, all the organization that went into that happening, it's all invisible. Like we don't see all of the people who are responsible for doing that. Who did the decor? Who did the visuals? Who did the sound? Who you know organized this stuff? Who did the tickets? The people at the ticket, you know, at the door who are taking tickets. All of these invisible hands that make it possible for things to happen.

But you know, we would not be here. Of course, you know, you wouldn't be on the densler if it weren't for the DJ. But you also wouldn't be there if it weren't for the musicians.

So it just highlighted for me, you know, the fact that I think the DJs, and certainly no, this is I'm not casting aspersions on anybody who was involved in this, right? You know, she played the most blinding set, and you know, he and everybody else. There was like the musicians made this music, and so it's just you know the public, I think, doesn't always recognize that.

So I just wanted to point that out because I just that was my thought at the time when I heard, you know, his name being shouted, which I was thrilled by, because it's like, you know, this is the, you know, it was like the third, fourth time that I heard Siaoshi. I heard him at a party in Japan just before I left.

So, but it was just that whole sort of like, wow, you know, so thrilled that they were hearing one of my idols, and they were hearing all of these idols of mine, and yeah, it was a magical event.

I gather that as clean and wonderfully, you know, pretty well maintained the Goa area was. The other areas in different rooms were not as well maintained, and just you know how they talked a science museum into hosting this event.

And I don't know the full story of what happened afterwards, but we can certainly imagine a lot of insurance was involved because not everything was in pristine condition afterwards. Same science museum, by the way. If you watch the first X Men movie, at the end, some of it is filmed in there. It's Liberty Science Center.

So when they're in the Statue of Liberty, you know, but it's actually there's a science center that they're in for part of the lead up to that. So it's certainly how we felt there. It was like very science fiction. It was very, it was really magical, and it was a hundred and ten percent worth me going there from London and then back because it actually ended up ended up Meeting people there who I connected with in London as an experience.

I mean, right now, I mean, you know, the emotion that's coming up and my exposure to, in a sense, what I see that I've been trying to carry the torch for, you know, in North America, and seeing, you know, some people really get it, a lot of people really don't, and see, you know, that spark start to happen, you know.

There were people on the dance floor who were, you know, pulling me over, of course, because I looked like was very colorful with the clothing I was wearing, and they were just like, "What is this?" And I was like, "I've been there," you know. I was definitely in that state, and it was just really cool to see, you know, these eyes widening, and you know everybody, you know, not criticizing that they were doing the circles.

I mean, it sounds like that, but you know everybody was doing what they could. Everybody's like there, enjoying it in the way that they could. And I think they were starting to sort of recognize, okay, this is different. This is not the same music. It's not the same kind of energy. How do I engage with this? It was all pretty amazing.

So we all wanted stories. We got stories. That was, you know, my the start of that party was in a sense the start of my time in London. In a sense, even though I was at two events the weekend before, before I went to this one, and we'll be touching in on that when I went to return to the source actually in the UK before going to it in New York.

So there we are, absolutely jaw-droppingly unbelievable, magical production by the great Simon Posford. I'm not sure he likes this track quite as much as I do. I think it is the bomb. So much going on, and you know, for me, obviously, you know, where I was describing it, I think you know, I was really tying in that personal recollection.

I mean, there's what what there is in the music that stands apart from personal experience, right? So for me, it's really linked with that triumphant ending of like, oh my gosh, this, you know, this just entered the consciousness of so many North Americans who just did not see this coming, and the fact that the music itself really has all this rich content already independently of that event, Absolute magic.

So here we go. I am going to sign off, and I'm just going to give a little heads up that I am going to be on a plane to Goa very shortly. So here I am, like I'm going off actually to Goa for the first time. It's my 30th anniversary in this scene, first time going to Goa, and certainly first time playing there since it's the first time I'm going.

So there'll be a Break in this kind of episode because I don't think I have the time to film anything else. But we'll see if I do anything else, and if in the meantime I don't, you'll be catching me when I'm back.

All right. So thanks so much for tuning in, Mark DJ Solitaire, and I'm gonna leave you now with a complete masterpiece released by the Infernal Machine, The Loin King. Thanks for watching!
