Artist: Pleiadians
Song: Time Dilation
Year: 1996

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 54 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which every episode I share one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We had a few weeks break while I was in Goa for the first time. Lots to tell that I'll share in another Medium at some point, but we are resuming now weekly and possibly moving to faster than weekly because I did a little checklist of tracks that I wanted to include from the '96-'97 season, which is where we're currently in in this series, and there's tons of them. So I mean, it'll take me almost a year to get through all the tracks that I'd like to feature from this season. So we'll see at what pace. But currently we're going every week.

This is the second episode of tracks that I first encountered in the sort of autumn '96 through to the sort of same period in '97, roughly. Although This one slightly predates September '96, but I realized I really had to include this. It really does figure into, in a sense, my entry into London in September '96. And so, as always, there's a story. There's lots of stories.

So when I left Japan And in July '96, my family had left Montreal. I was, my sister was in Vancouver, so I went there, and stayed actually with a party friend from Tokyo who had an apartment that he was keeping in Vancouver. So I stayed there for six weeks, and before I went to London, the I believe the first weekend of September '96, somewhere around there, and I told the story in episode fifty-three about you know just one day before moving to London, finding out about that epic party that took place in New York.

So, in Canada, really back then, pretty much as well as now, they were quite behind in terms of goa stuff. But I heard from Gio Makyo, who I've mentioned before, the wonderful ambient composer and DJ who used to play at Odyssey all the time. We must have been in touch by phone. There was no internet. There was no Facebook. And I remember hearing from him while I was in Vancouver. He said, "You have to get this new compilation CD On Matsuri, it's just come out, and there is some amazing stuff. There's a great Astral Projection one, but he said, but there's this gigantic, enormous Pleiadians track with all these alien voices, and it's absolutely incredible. I've mentioned Gio Makyo having told me about the First Flight CD several times, and he told me about this Matsuri CD, The Truth of Communication.

Now, somehow, you know, there was nothing in Canadian CD stores. But I was staying near, I was staying near the, really, the downtown area in Vancouver, and there was a HMV store there. And I walked in, and I don't know what section I was looking in, but they had this CD in there, and actually really competitively priced. So this would have been August '97. The CD came out in apparently in July '97. So I, sorry, '96. I'm getting my years mixed up already. So it was in August '96. I definitely didn't find this in Tokyo. Absolutely found this on Robson Street. I was in Vancouver. I was absolutely stunned that this Killer CD made it, and so soon after its release.

And you know, first track on the CD is by The Pleiadians, "Time Dilation," ten minutes, just under, I think nine fifty-nine or so. Um, and I put it on, and you know, that's the opening track on the compilation. And boy, it is dramatic, and as Gio Makyo said, alien voices, but not in the way that I had imagined when he talked about it. And that's the great thing about music—you know, we can we can describe it and we can try to give impressions based on what's going on in the music and what we hear, but the actual listening experience is different. And what I'm trying to do in this series is, you know, have the two simultaneously. We are actually having listening experience, and then I'm pointing to sort of what these sounds inspire in my consciousness, anyway.

So, you know, this is this is the first compilation CD on Matsuri, first of many to come, great ones. I've got stories about tracks on all of them, and sure enough, you know, I put this on, and oh boy, this is a completely different kind of track. Structure, extremely long introduction: what's happening structurally, harmonically, and even the sound signature for me—you know, it's it's recognizably Pleiadians slash Etnica because you know Cladius was their a name that was being used when they weren't releasing tracks on Blue Room. And yet, you know, there's something really quite different about this particular track. Harmonically, melodically, the whole structure is pretty incredible. There are some interesting intervals that are going on here. We have that good old minor second and minor third happening a lot, but there's also a minor sixth, which is pretty unusual. So you'll be hearing, you know, I'll point out when we hit that that particular melodic content, where it's basically just bouncing between all of these notes and those and those patterns, it'll hit a perfect fourth, you know, which is part of the regular scale, either major or minor. But that minor sixth is is pretty unusual.

So, Mauri gave me a little bit of insight into this one. You know, there's there's a previously unreleased version that ended up coming out on DAT Records in a compilation of Pleiadians tracks, and that one had circulated on DAT, and you know, I would get that years later, but unfortunately, whoever recorded that particular version had done it with the auto volume thing, so anytime it got louder, the music got softer. It was incredibly frustrating and couldn't be played out. But musically, it's beautiful. Finally came out, but this original one has a very different impression.

Now, as for the title, you know, this version is ten minutes long. The other version, I think, is like thirteen to fifteen minutes long, somewhere in there. So I mean, we're talking about Time Dilation already, and certainly, you know, when folks were in a creative state, and when you're at parties, you definitely always at this real experience of time going at a completely different pace. So, definitely a feeling of Time Dilation.

So, there's lots to say about this amazing track, but I think it's best that I do a little bit more while we're listening, And I'll drop in a couple of insights that Mauri was kind enough to share about some of the synthesizers. Won't go heavy into that though, but a couple of little details. All right, so let's get ready and listen to Time Dilation by The Pleiadians.

So there's some of those alien voices, right? Now again, you know, I think a lot of the music on that big system with synthesizers would sound like voices. Now the synth sound and the note progression, plus these voices, and this is a pretty unusual combination. Very unique sound signature. There's the kick. So the crying sound in the intro is the Korg MS-20 in a weird setting, as Mauri. The crying sound in the intro is the Korg MS-20 in a weird setting, as Mauri put it. Just click on the synthesizer for the weird setting and there you go. Beautiful syncopated hi-hat, and then... It's very beautiful the way it just keeps going up keeps going up and then it just like opens up the space for this other band of voices to come in again it's all voices everywhere and a little bit more rhythmic stuff going on there.

Notice how the kick drops out a little bit there. Add a bit more tension. And then... an SH-101 is going to come in for this gigantic voice, this explosion that comes in right here. This anguish, something we're going to hear in some later Pleiadian stuff when we get to their album. The angst, the emotion, this sort of cosmic cry of sort of the universal, almost pain of existence, the enormity of everything. Just the build-up here.

Now this is actually a same preset, also a Screaming Butterfly, but an octave higher. Beautiful counterpoint to the melodic cry that came before. Notice this textured voice. Up and notice this textured voice that's underneath that sort of adding this rhythmic and sort of tense element here and this beautiful riff this is again the one with it goes up to a minor sixth minor second minor third again, these synth sounds don't sound like synths. When you're in context and get this on a big system, big, big stuff happening.

That pattern from the introduction coming in from the bass, a lot of really complex harmonic stuff happening simultaneously. Is that scream? Blinding melody as well as a mellowing, a little bit pulled back. And. Is that some of these voices are getting louder now? And I mean, really in this harmonic loop, I mean, when you're in that time dilated state, and you just completely don't know how long any of this has been going on.

A bit of the hi hats pulling back over here, and we get an interesting chord progression here in very Close Encounters of the Third Kind. It's all going to pull away shortly, so that we can actually hear what the single progression is. Now we can hear it more, just an interesting four note pattern, ooh, went down that time, and then, I don't know, what were those sounds? There's some real tension in this gnarly roughness. The laser sounds, a bit of those cascading arpeggios, so much tension going on here. So much tension building up.

Then another kind of anguished cry. Look at that! This brilliant structure, right? I mean, this voice, these voices come in just at the right times. This beautiful development, and then this tragic Greek cosmic chorus comes in, Greek in the sense of like the Greek dramas where the chorus is they're exclaiming something in the background.

Then, key turning point here. Awesome. Awesome. So all these elements, there's that rhythmic stuff going on, these repeated notes. Well, there's this dramatic harmonic, harmonic pattern repeating. Then we you get more of that rhythmic tension playing out. Another cycle of 8 bars, I think, for this one. And then this, triumphant and anguished at the same time, sort of celestial trumpets yes, in a way.

And the ending here is just kind of like again the end of this like this giant cosmic message that we've been downloaded with I mean, what do you do after that? This is the whole challenge with some of these tracks that are so amazing, so powerful, that have such a a key story and signature and message. What are you going to play before that? What are you going to play after that? These are not the kinds of tracks that you just put on to get an effect, right? This is what gets the crowd going, or it's what gets gets the crowd pumping. It's like this is when you know it's time to really cut through everything and get to the heart of the person, the heart of the matter, the heart of existence, feels like.

And then how do you mix out of that? I mean, this is not a kind of track you're just going to sort of keep the kick going necessarily, you know, beat match out of it. Um, I I've never played this out. I would like to. Um, would really require some non-linear, non-kick-based mixing. I think there might be a couple of things you could do if there's a long enough intro to keep the pulse going.

But I mean, that is just such a gigantic, gargantuan, enormous, epic— you know, cosmic level, dramatic track. They don't, you know, when you put this on, it really has to be right time, right mood, right place. And yeah, it's really in a league of its own.

As I said, we will be looking at The Pleiadians, of course, when we get to the album IFO. And going to be tough to pick one from that. I know which one I'm choosing already. Might have to be two from it really. It's the whole thing is amazing, and again, it's like each one has its signature.

This is such a unique sound, structure, story, and scale—not just the scale with the minor sixth, but but you know the the scope of this track is really just on a whole other level. It's really made to be heard outdoors, under the stars, not with a tarp over you. I just had this conversation in Goa, actually. Now that we're doing multi-day festivals, you know, and you're going to be there during the sun, and it was blazing hot. And go, I can tell you, we were very happy to have that tarp there. Um, but it cuts you off from the stars, and the whole thing about listening to this kind of music outdoors is that direct connection to the heavens.

And so, what was interesting was how much of the crowd came out from the tarp, and they were drawn into that space where there was that direct connection under the stars. I found that interesting, and this is the kind of music that you know you want to be looking at the stars and you want to be sort of feeling your feet on the ground while you're connected to the great beyond, that which is seen and that which is not seen.

So, big, big stuff. I will leave you now with the complete track without my commentary, and you can enjoy the glorious magnificence of this absolutely cosmic creation. I'm Mark DJ Solitare signing off episode 54 and leaving you with the complete track by The Pleiadians: Time Dilation.
