Artist: Prana
Song: Boundless
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 55 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which, in every episode, I share one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are currently exploring tracks that I came across in the 96-97 season, so Starting in the autumn of '96, and this is really a track that was—it just immediately brings back memories of that incredibly optimistic time. I had just moved to London.

I was really enthusiastic about, you know, meeting producers and going to return to the source and other events that were, you know, Kind of really well known already in the pre-internet age, even outside of the UK. And I spoke about in episode 53 when I talked about the premiere of the loin king that Cielshi played at the end of this return to the source party that took place at a science museum In New York, I spoke about that incredible event and how that was, you know, ironically, you know, I left North America to go to the UK and then came back to North America two weeks later to go to this party, which really was a launching pad for my experience in Europe and some of the relationships that I developed there. And of course, I can't remember exactly what I was hearing because the tracks were all new. But later on, you know, I could recognize signature elements of what was being played.

I remember certain samples that I heard in, you know, certain artists' sets. And this one, you know, I remember particularly Some of the sounds that I heard in Sealish's set, his closing set, and absolutely he played this incredible piano track, Boundless, which, as a title, of course, really captures the essence of how it is that we feel when we're in that state, and what these parties really help us to do—to break beyond Our boundaries and experience that boundless level of consciousness and existence. And I just remember, you know, when I think back to the really ecstatic, uplifting, otherworldly nature of his closing set. Just the sounds, you know.

As soon as I heard this track and you know got my hands on it, I was like, oh yeah, this is definitely one of Those ones that he played. I remember, you know, there's Process X One for sure. There was Psychopods track on Tips Phosphorescent compilation. All of these are tracks that I'm going to be covering in this series.

But for this one, I really wanted to go into this unbelievable track that's just been this kind of light motif as well. When Prana did the first live in 2013 New Year's, going into 2014 in Tokyo, the first time that Sioshi, Nick, and Andy performed together, it was just every time I, you know, when I showed up at the gig for the sound check, and when I showed up in, you know, for the rehearsals as well, that was the track that was playing, And it's just always been this very, very special track. So apparently they produced this, hot on the tail of Primal Orbit, which is their first release track. Now, if I remember correctly, they actually did an earlier version of Alien Pets than the one that was released, and I think that was dated '95.

But whenever it is that they did Primal Orbit, that was the first one that came out, was a huge success, and so again they just wanted to push limits, and so this was done in the summer of '96, according to the press release, and Yoshi and Andy were saying, you know, that they were again, you know, really wanting to create something, you know, that picked up from where Primal Orbit Started just kind of a classic. If you think about the progression of the titles, you know you have this primal orbit, and then now we've sort of break free of any orbit. We're just boundless. And so there's a bit more percussion here, as has been mentioned before.

Toshi was a percussionist, was a drummer, and you know there's a different kind of vibe. I realize I just did a Prana track a few episodes ago, because The first Prana album, which is of tracks that Toshi did with Nick Taylor, even though those tracks were done by '94, the album only came out in '96. And there's a different flavor that we hear in some of the tracks, you know, that Toshi did with Nick and that he did with Andy. There's this extra level of Kind of funk and earthiness and this clarity that's different from the more laser-like, otherworldly sound that we hear in the early Prana tracks.

All fantastic. We can all hear Siochi's influence and you know what's in common, and then we also hear you know what did Nick bring to it, what did Andy bring to it, and so Here we have, you know, this infectious bounce, and some of the synth sounds. You know, there's a different quality to the synth sounds in the Prana V2, as I call them. You know, the second iteration of Prana, and this track is just—I mean, it really is an all-time classic.

There were some remixes that were released around 2013, and also some great ones, but this original is really the bomb. And it it just immediately when I hear this, there's lots of parties that I think of, but the vibe of the New York one where there was you know this four story atrium, and this you know beautifully lit space And just this absolutely this vibe that was just so uplifting. I mean, this track just really captures all of it. So, what do you say?

I think we should probably give this a listen. Prana masterpiece, boundless. Okay, interesting little sound. Now that actually sounds more like some of the early Prana stuff, right?

These these sounds, a little bit of that scar. Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force, Force Then, this key sound here. up up up in this track there was nothing like this going on at the time this really was breaking boundaries this rhythmic texture kind of crunchy sound is it's just gorgeous notice the baseline syncopated and this is just kind of you know groovy and funky and doesn't really give you a sense of that extraterrestrial stuff that's coming in here and then we have this bounce I notice that just goes up that little bit. And then back to blind.

So much of this. I mean, this is really just one of the most uplifting tracks ever. Again, you know, it just keeps going up. As I said when we did Green Nuns, for example, right?

You just have this sense you just think things can't go further, and then they do. And we're just at the beginning of the track. There's this incredible optimism from this baseline here, and this is just phenomenal. And there's nothing cheesy about this.

That's the thing. It's uplifting, but it's not derivative in any sense. These arpeggios. I mean, you know, again, listening at home sounds fantastic, but when you get this on a big system, this is a whole other story.

It's really this whole other frequency and sort Of location, in a sense, and in terms of the sound world, beautiful sheen to that sound, and then that growling kind of bass line, which is still really uplifting. That beautiful percussion break there, and then beautiful. I mean, just abstract and just kind of a little bit all over the place. Not that we've ever felt that before.

What a creative shift of direction, right? I mean, Not like the derivative triplet thing that we hear now. That is really clever in terms of doing a break. And this, some great percussion that's going to come in right here.

And the clarity, right? The way you hear that baseline so beautifully with all these percussive elements above. And structurally in the story, right? Takes a break from those other synth sounds, those squealy, arpeggiated, and sort of whooshy things, and now things start to come back.

Beautiful sheen, beautiful like shining. It's a beautiful sheen, beautiful like shiny kind of sound here, a little bit more texture. Notice how it fits in with those rhythmic, percussive elements. Again, now that up and down, arpeggiated sheen happens, and then that.

and just this drive again this is just so optimistic let's see what lower down really lifting up Gorgeous break again. Listen how, I mean, just everything is layered and structured so beautifully here. Losing the force. And then this is how you do a Breakdown, guys, right?

Pulls out, and then just building. I'm going to start climbing happening again. Wow. Definitely in the spring of 96, it is autumn of 96, so there's nothing else out there compared to this incredible optimism, combination of funk and otherworldliness.

Now we've got some things pulling out. I just love those bleepy sounds. Let me adjust that for you. And then just that little outro, about a little while, about a 30 second outro.

It's nice to be able to hear the sounds and hear a little bit more clearly what was going on with all those other layers happening. I mean, really boundary-defying stuff, you know. So, "Boundless" really is the perfect title. As I was saying while it was playing, I mean, there was just nothing like it at the time.

You know, it was a really revolutionary time. Things it was seemed like things were taking a quantum Leap in terms of imagination, in terms of the sounds that were being produced, and you know, again, this is just like this otherworldly, but still also feet very much on the ground with that growling, you know, bass line that's uplifting but also very earthy. While there's all this, you know, wildness spinning around, and it was exactly What we were feeling at these events, you know, that New York one in particular, where it was like, you know, we're very much on the ground in this carpeted, you know, science museum with this four-story atrium above us. I mean, it was really just like this, you know, sort of you're there on the ground, you know, feeling yourself grounded, dancing, and then, you know, all these boundaries Are just being broken, so yeah, an absolutely classic track.

It was released on an EP with another mix of Boundless on the other side that I don't think has been played quite as much. It's going to be one that I'm going to revisit, but I gave it a listen just before filming, and you know, I mean, my heart really is with this one because it's the more familiar one. And then in early '97, a second Prana album came out that featured four tracks of Toshi and Andy together, and then five remixes of Prana tracks, which includes at least one or two that we're going to be having listened to in this series. But but There we go.

I really wanted to feature this track because, again, it's just kind of that launch into the '96 '97 season for me, with this sense of you know the sky opening optimism that I still like to think the scene can offer, and with this you know the boundless creativity And options that are available for musicians, and what they can create, and what it is that we can also experience as these individuations of consciousness on the dance floor. So there we go. I am going to sign off and leave you with the whole track.
