Artist: X-Dream
Song: Panic in Paradise
Year: 1996

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 58 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We're into my third year in the scene, starting around September 1996. And in around the first weekend of September, I moved to London to get more active in the scene, and started going to events there. As well as two weeks later, flying back to New York, as I've talked about in a couple of previous episodes.

And the track that we're going to feature today is one of the ones that stands apart for several reasons, but specifically from that period, not just because it was released, it's an all-time classic. It was on one of the best compilations ever. But this track had the distinction of getting perhaps the biggest response on a dance floor. It was one of the top three tracks that consistently would get a huge response on the dance floor, and it was something that struck me in general with the parties in London versus what it experienced in Tokyo.

Now, if you go back to some of the earlier episodes where I featured, for example, Total Eclipse, Aliens, you know, and the Transwave, whatever the one was, which is escaping me now, where I showed film footage of events in Tokyo, and you can see people really going for it. And the aliens one, you could really hear people screaming and yelping and hollering and so on and so forth, really, really going off. That didn't happen a whole lot in London, and I was just kind of like, "What's going on here? What's kind of what's up with the crowd?" You know, I also found that it was it was just a little bit muted.

This track, plus a couple of other ones, which when we get there I will name them. They all have some common elements here, actually. This is one of the tracks that consistently, every time it was played, people would be yelping and hollering. And it's not that I can explain why when it comes to this track, it's a great track, but I'm just surprised that it was so rare. You know, it just really stood out. So obviously, this is a really great track because you know it really appealed to the Brits, who could be a little bit, you know, I found the crowd there to be a little bit uninvolved and finicky, and so on, as demonstrated by that lack of yelping and hollering.

But here we go. This is from one of the first compilations that I got, soon after moving to London, which I still consider to be one of the all-time greats. So we're talking in autumn of '96. Doubt it was September, might have been, but I suspect it was October. It was pretty much within my first month that I remember finally getting this, and I say finally because there were a couple of tracks here that I remembered hearing at the New York party that I could recognize and say, ah, that was that track.

This was TIP Records' fourth compilation, the Phosphorescent compilation, which is a doozy. I mean, this is really one of these. It's so groundbreaking. There's so many incredible tracks in a range of range of styles and so on. I just absolutely love this one. You can still see the sticker on there from Zoom Records. I forget where that one was, but it was somewhere in downtown London. Might have been Berwick Street. There was a street that had a few, um, few record shops that I used to go to. And used to sort of just go from one to the other, hoping to find something good. And sometimes I did.

Um, we're gonna listen to "Extreme Panic in Paradise," dressed for the occasion today, which is the fifth out of nine tracks on here. It's worth noting, by the way, that the track was mistracked. The cue for the beginning of the track was a little bit messed up on the CD, so you hear actually the beginning of the track at the end of the previous track, which is hallucinogen's jaw-dropping, lysergian warning remix of "Soothsayer," which we will get to, lots of stories about that too. But for now, I wanted to cover this amazing, amazing track.

The only intel I can offer about this one is the fact that Jan, who's one of the two halves of of Extreme, Jan Mueller and Marcus Michael. Jan wrote this on his own, and so this is fresh, new intel. The booklet didn't say that it is written by Rough and Rush, which was the names that they went under, which we can see in their earlier releases as well. But Alex, a good friend of mine who works closely with them asked Jan on my behalf, and he's like, "Oh yeah, I wrote that one on my own," as as was the case with Freak. So those are the two tracks that Jan wrote on his own. Doozies indeed, and they're all doozies. Let's face it.

At this period, Extreme was in another stratosphere. I think really, you know, '96 to '98, we hear like a whole range of sounds, and we're gonna, of course, by the time we get to their album in '98 and so on, there's there's stuff to cover before then as well. But so on this compilation, I think a lot of people missed if they were just tuning in at track five, they missed about a minute of the introduction or so. But I mean, it's all atmospheric, and that's actually, something that's I think really key—the fact that there was this attention to atmosphere—it's something I was planning on talking about once I start playing, but I've already started talking. So I kind of think we should probably start listening.

It's a longer track; it's about ten minutes when you're playing, actually, the whole thing and not the miscued version. And I mean, it's it's a doozy. It's got all kinds of wonderful elements. So let's get this started.

Just that atmospheric noise, like you're in outer space, and this would just be perfect. I'm not sure that I ever heard this outdoors. That this is perfect for outdoors under the stars. And very few people are brave enough now to play a full introduction like this? There's not enough going on, but when you're outdoors and you know, listening to the sounds of outer space, this is big. Some of this sound you would hear you would hear when they when you when you listen to the side project of Organic Noise. But this is just all these like Quantum outer space noises with this.

That was cool. Good undulation at the bottom, and then quite an upbeat baseline. It just starts to come in, sort of in contrast to the mysterious opening. Great rhythmic element there. There's a real, um, a lot of extreme stuff in this period, there's a lot of chugga-chugga, kind of like a real groove and grinds to it. Listen to how different things come in at different beats in the bar. And all this, you know, things going off left and right, different beats, really keeps your attention. That bouncing. Little texture coming in there. You still have the atmospheric, you know, atmospheric noise in them, those voices. Extra level coming right there. Chugga-chugga factor is in full force.

Key element coming in here. I'm going to get that major-minor feeling, going through some phasing, now it becomes this one's more prominent. Extra little insults. We've got some extra little insults. Breakdown coming. Again, kick drops out. It's not all new material, right? This is how we do a proper breakdown, folks. Love this. It's this kind of consistent, again, quasi-anguished, celebratory kind of blend of emotions here.

Not that dissimilar when you think about it, from what we hear in *Create Here and Now*. Not that dissimilar when you think about it, from what we hear in Creator Unhappiness, right? Again, that kind of triumphant celestial trumpet kind of situation, a little bit of a different sonority, but similar effect. Listen with headphones; you really start hearing some extra layers. It's just incredible.

Now here, this is kind of the key element of the track. It's going to start showing up shortly. It's going to go through a shift. It's just like these gorgeous celestial raindrops of gold that come down. And then here. This is where the crowd would go mental each time. This beautiful melting effect, right, that happens, that really gets people. Love how you know, again every eight bars get something else and. I love how, you know, again, 838 bars, get something else, and that upper frequency opens up.

Shift over there. He gets away for that other. We're back to the celestial trumpets. Similar frequency, right? Same kind of tonal range, but different sound. Such an interesting blend right. This kind of inquisitive, uplifting, plaintive. Like again, there's all these different emotions happening simultaneously, which is sorely lacking these days.

Very effective break as well. Starts to build attention. Oh again the wave also has those other sounds that are happening at the same time the ones that have pitch but not tone, at least texture not tone. This texture. This gets pretty hypnotic with this spiraling, this particular voice figure system.

We're back with that sort of upper driving, chica chica kind of sound. Chicka chicka kind of sound. There's going to be a really great laser zap kind of sound coming in shortly. This kind of cosmic reverberations, and that bassline, now this you could say has that galloping quality and it's not as boring as the monotonous one that we're used to these days, right? This just keeps a driving rhythm. I think people might have been trying to copy this, but sorry guys, nobody's nobody's done what Xtreme has done.

Melting starting up here again. Again, those this sound just really got everybody going, and you know, big system in the right space. This is just voices, some kind of message right now. It really takes on almost like a little bit more of an uplifting quality in this particular round. So there's that modulation and then it goes back down. Getting that little t-shift. Getting that back down. Love how that went around it's just kind of a little hint we get to feel that rhythm again, like kind of Morse code message.

Now, just fades off. Oh, okay. Um, that really got the crowd going.

As I've said how many times now, uh, I remember an occasion when I was I was back at Sioshi's place after return to the source. I made it a habit to go, you know, to that party obviously every month. And then once I got to know Sioshi, I'll be talking about that. You know, I used to sort of hang out at the party, and then sometimes afterwards. And Mark Allen was there, and Mark had played this track, and I was commenting on it, and Mark was kind of laughing at me when it was just inquiring, I was just like, "Why does everybody go crazy for this track?" And he's like, "It's an amazing track." I was like, "I know it's an amazing track, but why aren't they going crazy more for other amazing tracks?" It was hard to really express it.

You know, this is not taking anything away from Extreme or this track whatsoever. But you know, it's a little segue into the fact that I was pretty disappointed overall with the vibe at the parties in London. I know I get some blowback for this, and people would say, "Oh, that venue was amazing! Such amazing times!" Yeah, Tyson Street. No, it was a toilet. It was really a dump. Uh, you know, underground always seemed to mean kind of, you know, really unkempt, messy, and horrible places. Uh, so it was not really fully into all of the party vibe at London. Some of it, of course, there were some great ones.

But what I was really lacking, what I thought was lacking, what I was missing from my experience was people absolutely going wild for the music and hearing it. And so, really, there were like two or three tracks where consistently there would be that reaction. And so, this one, you know, has always stood out for me because of that.

And of course, you know, it stood out a little bit because it was improperly cued on this amazing, amazing, amazing CD. And you know, there's a whole beautiful flow in the CD. So for you know this one to come out of the way that you know the Soothsayer remix sort of ends with this kind of undulation as well, and this sort of very dark energy and then it goes into this one. It's it's it's a beautiful flow. This is one of those great CDs and TIP comps were great for this. A lot of the good ones were where you can listen to it and it's like a DJ mix just without the full mixing.

So so there we go. Extreme Panic in Paradise. Bravo Jan! Incredible to know that he wrote this one on his own. It's a masterpiece. So many masterpieces. Again, this will be the challenge when you know there's how many episodes that I can do realistically here, and there's so many amazing tracks by these great artists to feature. So I've definitely got in mind some other ones for later, more when we get into '97 and ninety eight, of course, several. But that's that's it for now.

So I will sign off, and I'll leave the entire track for you to enjoy with that full, long, atmospheric ending and all those incredible bits and bobs. And we'll see if it gets you whooping and hollering in your living room or wherever it is you may be. So, thanks for tuning in. I'm Mark DJ Solitaire, leaving you now with the complete Panic in Paradise by Extreme.
