Artist: Phreaky
Song: Over The Moon
Year: 1996

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 59 of Retro Goa Explorations. In this series, I'm presenting in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement.

We are into the 96-97 season, and I think I finally figured out which compilation that I got first when I went to London. As I was checking the release dates, I was thinking back, and so I thought I would feature a track from this one, and it's a doozy. This is Order Odonata, the third compilation, which was released in August, but I definitely got this in London because we can see the very expensive price tag from HMV, fifteen pounds was, I mean, that's basically it was like thirty dollars, and this is almost thirty years ago. So CDs were expensive; they were always very expensive in the UK. Same thing in the classical scene. And while I was living there, what was I going to do, right? So, of course, I knew Dragonfly. First compilation I ever bought was *Order Odonata* Volume One. Got Volume. First compilation I ever bought was Order Odonata, Volume One. Got Volume Two in Tokyo as well, and this one was Volume Three: The Technical Use of Sound in Magick, Magic with a K at the end. Very old school.

And so, you know, I'm pretty sure I got this really early on in my stay in London, starting in September '96, and I remember distinctly walking around town with my discman, right, my CD portable CD player. Not sure if that one had anti-skip or not, but in any case, I nothing was going to stop me from walking around and listening to this music. And I really remember the impact that a few of these tracks had on me, of course, including the one we'll do today. It was really an evolution in the sound. I mean, you can hear that things were starting to go in a different direction. And let's face it, I mean, isn't that what should be, hopefully, the right direction? Of course. And flash forward 20 plus years, we can talk about that.

But I wanted to feature the track , third track on here, "Over The Moon" by Phreaky. So this is a collaboration between the members of Cydonia and Indoor. So Cydonia, at this point, we've got Dino Psaras, master DJ, Phenomenal DJ. We'll be talking about some of his sets and tracks that I remember him playing, together with Steve Ronan. This is before Ian Rive joined the group. And then there's Indoor, which is Avi Algranati, Ofer Dikovsky, and often overlooked Marko Goren is his name on the labels' last name is really Gorkin. He left the scene. I mean, basically worked as a producer, wasn't really active as a DJ, so he often gets overlooked.

But these five produced this track in the downstairs studio, the larger of the studios at the Butterfly Studios in Brixton, which was really a trance HQ. This is where a lot of the tracks, and we've talked about them before, were produced at these studios. There was a smaller upstairs studio and then a larger downstairs studio. So, you know, all these great spirits, several Hallucinogen tracks. What else did I mention was produced there? Prana did two tracks there, one of which was "Pneumatic," which was featured in this series. And Steve told me that at one point, Youth, legendary producer whose heart is really in, you know, the goa and psychedelic movement, but you know, a very famous producer, Grammy winner, and he came down at one point during the session and was mimicking, picked up a guitar and was mimicking the bass line.

So, so this track is, you know, really is a different kind of flavor. Of course, it's got some elements that were part of the trance lexicon, but not fully, in the sense of some pretty heavy guitar. And, you know, I remember at the Equinox parties in particular in Japan, you know, Juno Reactor's Loyalizer remix and a couple of other tracks where there's a bit more of that, you know, kind of rock and roll feeling, but you know, really a cyber rock, right? Like electro rock kind of thing happening, but still very tribal and psychedelic. So we've got a bit of that going on here. Some very cool synth sounds, beautiful harmonies and melodies, and so on. And it's just all around a really great track with a lot of dimension, a lot of direction.

So I think that's it. Obviously, we'll have things to say as I usually do while it's playing. So why don't we get started with "Over The Moon" by Phreaky?

So there's that guitar. I love the way this just comes in. You know , this pulse, and you've got that chord that's coming in. This is great for doing some long preview mixing, which I love to do. Not sure that I've ever played this track out. Might have done back then. That this kind of intro really lends itself for that kind of introduction.

Then, so this kind of pattern heard in right in Cyberjam before Alphaflight, and also Transwave. I think one of the tracks that we did had this similar kind of pattern, but it sounds totally unique to to them in the sense of note combinations. Notice that rhythm and Again, that hi hat in there, and now the way that bass line plays with that upper pattern, as well as the rhythmic stuff. And notice how this bass this bass line especially reminds me of one of the Transwave tracks we did. Notice how there's that one-note variation. Beautifully hypnotic. Love that little shrill in there, a little Dino specialty, he's got another great track What's up? Little Dino specialties got another great track with that.

I love the way there's that tweak stuff up at the upper level, while there's that clearer harmonic arpeggiation, and all this beautiful phasing, right? I'm a big system. This is just going to be, you know, swimming around all over the place. And then shh. I love. Again, we're still getting those beautiful whoosh sounds in there. Beautiful atmospheric mood.

I mean, it's really. I mean, think about when would you Play this. I mean, it's got so many different moods. It's got that kind of morning, but it's a little bit darker, right? The introduction and the guitar. It's a little bit heavier. It's really brilliant combinations of moods.

That comes back. Super effective little break there. Again, listen how many layers are happening simultaneously. Those little different things, and then another quasi-guitar riff. Again, that cyber-electro rock kind of thing. It's got again that beautiful combination of anguish and exclamatory, sort of you know, just all the feels. Beautiful patterning with that kick there. Love this bass line.

Arrows. What can you say while all this is going on? Beautiful. And, you know, the combination where we hear some notes, but then it sort of goes into those non-notey kind of tweaked sounds, and then this little bit. Now we've got this sound building up about this building up.

And let's look and notice this break here. Wow. This is predicting there are other... Actually, it's related to what came out before this, didn't it? Tornado. Again, that really explanatory, this is it kind of energy. Oh, no guitar there, eh? Just this time?

So every, every four bars lose the kick. Those little flying sounds, and I just love the clarity of those with the bassline. And then, quick little key change there, very cool.

Listen how many different I mean what a storyline right with some some new stuff that's actually coming in that's related to what's been going on so there's this evolution that's really happening and those other sounds happening there the intensity really building up. Really Effective pauses.

Speaking of which, I mean, after all that, you do need to catch your breath, don't you? And what a brilliant way! Again, there's all these stories and all these phases that go on and build up, and you've got to take a break. But the break is incorporated into the story. Right? It's not introducing new material as everybody seems to do nowadays.

Listen how. Wow, you know, there's something really like ethnic, tribal about this kind of pan flutey riff over here, and that, again, the repetition of that riff really hypnotic, along with all this other slightly more earthy, but also really cosmic, otherworldly sounds.

Another round, right? So everybody's totally going for it at this point. I just know the guitar is a lot softer at this point. All right, so that other big voice just pulled out. Now we've got more aerated sounds with that guitar. And the kick leaves. We've just got that beautiful bass line, this concluding synth sound.

A full-on story. And when I say full-on, by the way, I'm not talking about a kind of music because that was not a term. Wasn't used that way back then. The term full-on was really a British term for like yeah, full power. Almost 10 minutes. Really, really long track for the genre, and I mean, brilliant, brilliant structuring and storyline.

I mean, really, as I was pointing out, you know, the way some of those voices evolve, the way the mood changes, and it shifts into these more atmospheric bits and more sort of cyber rock stuff, and then the ethnic, and then you know the atmospheric, the exclamatory, celebratory, emotional expressions and expulsions, and so on. A whole lot going on. Brilliant teamwork. If you think five musicians working on this, I mean, just incredible stuff.

So Phreaky did, you know, they had their Tornado track, which I didn't cover in the second Order Odonata compilation, and this one on the third. Not tons of music. I mean, they never came out with an album. You know, and Indoor was doing their thing, and Cydonia would end up doing theirs, and would move over to move over to Blue Room.

This comp, by the way, was the last one that was produced by Simon Holtom, who did the previous two, and it was released in August '96. And starting in September '96, Twisted Records started releasing things, and Simon Simon H has been the has been the manager of that label since September '96, right? So he was the he was the mastermind between everything that was going on at Dragon, you know, with everything that was going on at Dragonfly during that formative period with the Hallucinogen album and so on. So the first one at Dragonfly, and then you know, moving everything over to Twisted Records.

So you know, they never—it's—it's the interesting thing in these in these original compilations. You know, they—they never put the name of the producer. You have, you know, the engineers. You have the people who wrote the tracks and so on, and all these thank yous. But you know, a little bit of that invisibility for who's actually responsible for the compilation.

So, hat TIP to Maestro Holton for this incredible third compilation on the Dragonfly label, and of course to the five musicians who put that phenomenal track together?

So I will sign off in a few seconds here and leave you to listen to the whole track without my spoken commentary, so you can enjoy all of the all of the different dimensions and directions and sounds and so on.
