Artist: Hallucinogen
Song: Soothsayer (The Lysurgeon Warning Remix)
Year: 1996

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 60 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And here for episode 60, we are still in the early period of the ninety-six, ninety-seven season, my first month or two in London, when I arrived in the first weekend of September, and we're going back to a compilation that we've already touched on with one classic track, and this one is also, of course, quite a doozy. So this comp I probably got now. I've been narrowing it down. Looks like October, possibly November, of '96. Certainly one of the most memorable of the period. There's a lot of just absolute all-time classics, and really shows the development of the music quite wonderfully. And of course, it's from one of my favorite producers. It's the TIP Phosphorescent compilation again, where we had Panic in Paradise a couple of episodes ago. You can see I bought this at Zoom Records in London for eleven ninety nine, twelve pounds, getting close to twenty five thirty dollars, thirty years ago or so, and certainly worth it.

Now, Hallucinogen has two tracks on here. The opening track is Gamma Goblins, which I first heard him play. Remember, of course, with that distinctive opening. I remember that at the New York Return to the Source party, the third weekend or so of September '96. And then the fourth track on here, another Hallucinogen track, two on the same comp, Soothsayer, the The Lysurgeon Warning Remix. So there is a the original mix of Soothsayer was on a TIP single in 1995. I remember Oli ended. That was that last kicking track he played before part of the mystery of the yeti at the Fuji full moon party in October '95. And I've also got film footage of Jay playing that at Odyssey. Quite quite a classic, beautiful beautiful track. But this one, beautiful but in a very different way. It's not the first word that would actually come to mind, really. It's powerful. This is really one of the most astounding tracks, one of the best, deepest, darkest, most expansive nighttime tracks that I've heard.

I suspect the Lysurgeon Warning, Surgeon General is in the United States. That was the warnings that they had on cigarette packets, saying that this might be harmful to your health and cause all kinds of health issues. I suspect that the Lysurgeon warning remix was about this track, possibly, you know, requiring, you know, medical attention or possibly being hazardous. I personally think it's very good for your health to dance to this one.

Now, in this one, I'm not sure for all of the sessions, but for at least part, André, who was the TIP DJ, who worked on that Insect-A-Traction track that was covered in this series a little while ago, and and Raja Ram were both in the studio, Andre was the TIP label DJ at the time, and Andre was so blown away by this track that, which he affectionately called the Dog's Bollocks, which literally would mean the canine's testicles, but in British slang means it's something eminently worthy of respect. So yeah, this was the dog's bollocks, and he was so taken with this track, and obviously wanted to have a copy of it so that he could play it out and blow the lid off the party. That he made Simon a DAT digital audio tape with all of his newest, greatest stuff, including Panic in Paradise and Psychopod and other things that would show up on this compilation, and the label of the DAT was "We're Not Worthy." So consider yourselves warned by the life surgeon and myself. This track is really a doozy.

Now, you know, I think a lot of darker tracks. What would start to happen is a lot of them just got dark and kind of mindless, and they go dark and deep without kind of that up or that forward momentum and sense of narrative. And so then, what started happening when DJ started playing entire sets of just dark music, or producers started producing it in that way, is you just get lost in the void. And this track really has a sense of proportion, a sense of rhythm, really a sense of as deep and dark and introspective as you can go with this. There's a lot of expansiveness. It's one of my all-time favorite nighttime tracks. I still play it a lot. I'll talk a little bit more about that when we get into some of the structural elements of this track.

It's got an extended introduction of about 40 seconds, 39, 40 seconds, which I remember because I used to on DAT I would practice all these different ways of mixing it, and generally after that long stretchy introduction, I'd sort of, you know, I would usually fade that in and then bring it in on the beat. But I remember Ollie playing at in ninety-seven, March fifteenth, ninety-seven, Ides of March. So I remember it. I remember in the middle of his four-hour set, he just dropped the whole thing with that full introduction, just like clearing the air. Really, really incredible way to do it. Pretty ballsy, whether of the dog or not, and very effective.

This is again. I mean, there's a lot to talk about with this one, so I think I'll just shut up now and get the track on, so that I can start making observations while it's playing. So here we go, the The Lysurgeon Warning Remix of Soothsayer by Hallucinogen.

Look about dropping. This is Timothy Leary. Same sample as the original track, and then it just these sounds, and it really sounds like the fabric of time and space and physicality are sort of being torn apart. I love the way the sample is being adjusted here. You've got like really low frequencies, high frequencies, and kind of moving up between them, as we'll have in the track as well. Then, I love the way that sound comes in afterwards, and that sort of slight bend here. Eerie.

Now, this the momentum from this bassline is incredible. While there's all these sounds just folding out of the fabric of space. Again, the rhythm, and then the kick. This is very like dark. This is very like German techno trance kind of as well. Listen to that. Those hi-hats just opens up that frequency and the rhythm. Just a little bit from the previous version of this track, takes on a very different atmosphere. Not quite as uplifting, but it adds just a bit of that lift that we need to keep things moving.

And then this get pitched, but not with tone, and it just climbs. So again, it makes sure that you know it's deep, but the whole spectrum is there, and these sounds really pulls at the your whole spirit. And this that riff, and that's going to be more prominent after this quick little break here.

And again, on a big system, this is so different. This is like some gigantic being's voice communicating something, and you get the message across. And this voice, and that again really gets the emotions going. There's another effect going on with that. Again, those rhythmic bits, and that kick comes out and then back in.

Now we're going to get all kinds of sounds that are just, again, like you're zooming through this psychedelic tunnel or through outer space and there's all these whooshes and harps and things just that rhythm it's just that rhythm. Love that upper frequency. These lightning bolts are going to be coming a lot. A lot. Notice how some of them are further back and more forward. We've got still that marching onward, and there's going to be this buildup happening happening here. I mean, just this real shift in the narrative here. This like climactic point. This is it.

Love again the way some of those sounds go down and up. Kick drops out. Again, the rhythm continues. Notice the rhythm of that. This is great bit here. And that riff is back. That kind of insistence.

Then, now we've got again that upper frequency filled in with these wild noises. So many. I mean, every time you listen to this, you think you can hear different kinds of voices in the arrangement between these patterns. That amazing voice, this streaming from the cosmos, this kind of angst and you know exclamatory. Most is kind of angst and exclamationary release of emotion, and that gigantic echoing, and then starts to unwind.

Got that last bit of that voice, that sensual slide with that inside your body, and then you notice that upper frequency like coming down. And of course, at this point the DJ would be mixing. Kind of, what do you play after that? But there's a few options. But just this incredible pulsing. And you need to light up a cigarette after that one. I mean, that is really like just puts you through the psycho-spiritual ringer.

Um. The psycho spiritual ringer, dogs bollocks indeed. We're not worthy. Really, something, isn't it? And so different from the original mix of Soothsayer. And this is what again can be so fascinating. You could take some of the same material and you have a bit of a different play around with it, you know.

And Andre was just kind of really into, I remember Simon telling me, you know, into that more stripped down kind of sound. He was a phenomenal DJ, very powerful, and you know, I think that's kind of what he contributed in terms of like, what if he did this, or you know, sort of stripping that down, stripping that down, and you know, the way those sounds like they just become these quantum patterns. You just have harmonically just a couple of little riffs in that voice, and then the depth, and you know, it really sounds like the fabric of time and space that you're moving through. While there's that harmonic sort of, you know, undulation, sort of those waves that you're sort of surfing while you go through cyberspace.

But the original mix, quite different. Let's listen to just a minute of it, and you'll hear. I mean, just from the opening, already is very different. You'll recognize the sample in maybe a couple of little bits. So you hear how different those those noises like that are, and then the kick comes in, very different kind of momentum. Right back in the day, when basslines varied from track to track, imagine that. Just listen how different that is. I mean, we recognize some of these patterns, right? But they're just not the same thing at all. Much more harmonic this track in terms of its the direction that it goes in.

So, so anyway, there we go. So yeah, The Lysurgeon Warning Remix of Hallucinogen's Soothsayer, definitely a pivotal, pivotal track. I'm not sure exactly for certain when I first heard it, but I think it was at the first return to the source that it was at in London, which would have been the second weekend of September '96. I know, I know my memory. And so the story is sort of: I went there for the first time. I was on the second floor, and Allison, who I've mentioned from Matsuri was selling Space Tribe clothes, so you know me, I see space drive yoink, and I'm like right there, struck up a conversation with her, and she introduced herself as well, and said, oh yeah, Tsuyoshi Suzuki should be starting soon. She's like, actually, I think this is him, and I'm certain this is the track that was on because I just recognize that kind of momentum and the the harmonic framework, and it's like sounds like Hallucinogen, um, and sure enough, so I'm not sure if Simon did play this one at New York. I mean, it's a different kind of vibe. Definitely played Gamma Goblins and the Snarling Remix. Remember, obviously knowing the album, remember hearing that one.

But then once this came out on the CD, I was just like completely transfixed. Now I did feature "Panic in Paradise," and as I mentioned at that time, the tracking of these two tracks was not properly done. So at the end of the track on the CD, you hear the opening of "Panic in Paradise" for about a minute, and then at track five, you know that wonderful spacey introduction of "Panic in Paradise" was already partway through. So important to note that, especially if you're DJing, sort of you know you have if you're playing on a CD, you have less time than you think you do before the track ends.

But yeah, I don't think I've ever played this with the full introduction. Would like to do it like that as a little hat TIP to Ollie, sort of with that all Z mix that he did in London with this. The whole thing is absolutely worth hearing, and there's a few, of course, brilliant tracks that'll go before and after this.

But you know, there's this deep, deep phase, and as I said, you know, I really think around started shifting around '98, but definitely by '99, a lot of the darker music that was coming out was like dark without any real frame of reference. So it was just kind of vacuous and empty, and you know, there wasn't a sense of narrative. There weren't all of these different elements holding it together, and I think the scene went really dark as well. You know, the darkness is part of it—the dark side, the light side. There is no dark side, really. It's all these are all just you know, these are all just different you know parts on the dimmer switch of dark and light, and and so it's an essential part of the journey, and how you navigate that through the middle of the night and part of the psychedelic journey, and then come out the other side, and what little transitions you go through there, really makes a difference.

So this is this continues to be one of my ideal nighttime power tracks to help people go through that part of the journey that still has a sense of direction and proportion, so that you don't get lost in it. There's that, right? As insular as it gets, it also has that expressiveness, and that's the dark and light sides coexisting, beautiful yin yang balance.

Okay, enough of that. I will sign off here and present the entire track without my commentary, so that you can get blown away by it and light up whatever it is that you need to during or afterwards. I'm Mark DJ Solitare, leaving you now with the complete Soothsayer The Lysurgeon Warning Remix by Hallucinogen. There are hundreds of universes.
