Artist: Unconscious Collective
Song: Fluorostani Transcendance
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! Mark, DJ Solitaire here with episode 65 of Retro Goa Explorations. In this weekly series, I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the Goa trance psychedelic dance movement of the 1990s. We're in our second year of episodes, but basically the third year of me being in the scene, so we're sort of looking at the from the autumn of '96 through to the late summer of '97, and the track today is actually one that was produced and released just before that, but I only came across it when I moved to London in the autumn of '96. This was being played a lot, and to be honest, I can't remember when I got my copy of it because it was only released on vinyl at the time. So it probably would have been later in '96, earlier in '97. But it's a track that's very distinctive. I certainly recognized it at the time, and it was part of, I think, a sort of a new, a new direction where music is really moving away from some of those harmonies that we've looked at. But it was really you know otherworldly and kind of chaotic and really creative and you know sort of breaking boundaries, which is really what this music's about, I think.

So yeah, so I got this on CD as well years later, so it was rare to find this on CD, I think, but it showed up on this one quite some time later, and we're looking at Unconscious Collective Fluorostani Transcendance. So here we've got three members of OOOD together with Tim Healey, who would become one of the two members of Quirk together with Mark Allen. So I have to refer to my notes now. Fortunately, Colin Bennun of OOOD was able to give me a ton of information. He's got a lot of very clear memories. You all say I've got a great memory, but of course, you know, very involved, really key production, and so you know, so there we go. So thank you, Colin, for all these details. I'm not going to be able to share everything. There's a lot of technical detail that would have me reading here for a long time so we'll maybe put that in the comments or sort of in the descriptive thread so that folks can gear folks can really get excited about all of that stuff. But basically, it's Steve Callaghan, Nigel Bradbury, and Colin Bennun, members of OOOD, together with Tim Healey, and was written in a single session of about four days, that's a single session apparently, in Stooodio, A.K.A. Colin's bedroom, in Oxford, and the final Cubase file was rendered because you know some people wrote these things down. Thanks for that. March fourth, nineteen ninety-six.

So this was actually released then on a Flying Rhino single in July of ninety-six. Now again, you know, at this point, I just I was just on the verge of getting to Canada. I was not buying vinyls, so this did not make its way into my ears or my grubby little hands until sometime in the autumn or winter '96 '97. So there's a few really cool details about the story, which is a nice, nice wacky one. So I just need to find them here and see if I'm able to actually read them. The concept of an extra-dimensional place called Fluorostan, a never-ending Goa trance party outside time and space that you could get to by expanding your consciousness, maybe with meditation, maybe on the dance floor, came from a conversation that Colin had had on Anjuna Beach in Goa in December 1995. Those Goa Beach conversations. The idea for that intro was, what if we progressed so much as a species that going to Fluorostan was so routine? Airlines ran services, the stuff the dreams are made of, indeed. And so, you know, we have this kind of like airplane announcement, and this sort of harkens back a little bit to what was the track, the Infinity Project's "Alien Airport," right, and similar concept, and I think all of us on the dance floor, listening to this wild and crazy music, had that kind of idea. So, so that's that.

Then there's a few interesting rhythmic pieces that are going on in the music that I'll point out. A couple of influences that I can hear in terms of what was in the zeitgeist musically, what producers were doing, and as we've heard, right, people got inspiration from each other and developed this. And there can be a lot of chicken and egg stuff. And they had such limited equipment, but you know, we've got a cool photo of Colin's studio, so we can see what there was there. He did say that Tim Healey showed up and basically brought his studio with him. And again, you know, it was such different times, right? Everybody had their sound because it was so based on the synthesizers that they had available, and then somebody would bring an extra piece of gear, and that would add this extra dimension, you know. And it's just like somebody bringing their own creative energy and adding an extra dimension there as well. So let me see what he said. Tim brought all his equipment with him, including a Korg Prophecy, which plays the final riff, and an Akai S2000 sampler, used mainly for effects and vocal samples. A Roland JV1080 playing the pads and some of the leads, and a Novation BassStation playing the middle section lead riff. Novation BassStation was, I remember, a big one everybody had at the time. And there's some more. So you know, again, I'll put those details in writing for you, equipment geeks. I'm the musical geek. I love what's going on musically, and that's what we're going to pay attention to now.

So let's listen to Fluorostani Transcendance, the Unconscious Collective. So this cool circular riff with a sort of gnarly sound, and then I love, as you know, I love Star Wars kind of futuristic sounds. Again, a lot of different textures and sounds and harmonies going on. So you know, love that rhythm. Then comes the kick. It's pretty quick, right? The kick. It's right now. It's just a few riffs that have come together. There hasn't been a real sense of a clear structure yet. Love that rhythm, right? It's got a bit of a krautrock kind of feeling to it as well, right? We've heard before. That was a script that they wrote, that their friend read, and then now here we hear a little bit of again chicken and egg influence with some of that you know, Cydonia, basically Phreaky riff, like similar to Tornado, where we have that sort of insistent riff, and also that yeah, sort of slightly nasal sound that's coming down. So a lot of different elements happening simultaneously again, and this key riff, which has a real Star Trek kind of feel. Now notice how the rhythm changes. Done this, you know, travel. So that sort of grinding sound. Well, we get Unconscious Collective being spoken. And this is, you know, a little bit almost more techno, more basic, like really early trance. So it's just that kind of atonal grinding. Quite similar. I love, you know, that you have all of this textured, grinding, crazy stuff. It's got this kind of elegant, beautiful synth arpeggiation going on. Stuff the dreams are made of, indeed, as he said. And again, a creative break. That kind of sound we would hear quite a bit at the time. And that's, I think, rhythm. Pitch change, and then we get those very common up and down dips. Build up back to the original key. Yeah. Again, sort of this familiar element from 94 and 95, right? So there's this whole blend. It's like you have sort of this, all the evolution, all these different evolutionary bits all in one. Right. And then that kick build up. It really sounds like you know you're going on this intergalactic voyage and you're just going through all these different landscapes each time it's uh each section of the track it just throws you up completely right so this is I mean this track is really to be dropped at a certain time where it's just gonna completely surprise you I love the way those two came together, and now this sounds like a sort of faded radio in the distance. And then it's kind of this, you know, heroic kind of riff, like we're arriving to our destination. And notice how all the voices play together so beautifully. Good opportunity for some cool mixing with this fade out. I mean, pretty intergalactic voyage, isn't it?

Um, so you know, this was again, as I said, it was like at this time where there were all these other forms that were evolving, all this other style of music. And so you know, you hear again like a bit of the influence of Prana on some level with this sort of rhythmic piece of Cydonia slash Phreaky with that sort of nasally kind of synth and that sort of whiny kind of you know insistent intense riff. There's some cosmic you know zaps that sort of sound like Rhythmystec. You know, I mean, and it doesn't sound like anybody else's music really right. It's just those elements. It's just like you know, we all sort of are used to seeing some of the same colors, and then you put them together, and you you create your thing. Of course, if it's fluoro, then you know the colors might look a little bit different. So really creative stuff.

Again, a track that I heard, I'm sure, for the first time in the autumn of '96. It was released on Flying Rhino, and Colin said that you know he was so he just idolized James and George so much that when you know they met at a party, talked about this, I think it was, and then you know when he actually went to the offices, he was kind of you know starstruck and tongue-tied, as is often the case. So that apparently did really, really well. So they were told that it was their best-selling vinyl to date. I'm not sure at what point they were told that, but you know, the the sales were great, and Flying Rhino out in an album, but it was just too challenging. They were really working on OOOD, but basically, you know, with everybody living far away, you know, doing it regularly, Tim, you know, being here and then being there and all of that, it just wasn't feasible. So unfortunate, but you know, a killer single for sure. One that definitely did the rounds and really, you know, I think came at this pivotal point where folks were getting less bogged down. And you know, we're going to see more of this kind of evolution, especially in '96 to '97, and I've covered a few tracks that show this already, and there's a few more coming where we just started breaking out of the structures of you know what is Goa, and you know this is an example. Yeah, it fits as part of the journey.

Now the whole thing for me is always with any sound, and this includes all of the stuff from before, I don't want to hear a set of any one sound. You know, this kind of crazy mayhem. This is fantastic in the middle of the night. You know, I always like to think that there's an uplifting nighttime style before things go dark, and there's this style here, and we're going to also hear, for example, in UX and things like that. You know, other projects with that sort of sound. There's the dark and hard, but it's still up. And I think as we've gotten accustomed to hearing live sets, which you know is great to hear, to appreciate artists, you know, and see them there, and you know, have you know their their style presented. Um, one of the challenges can be, and I think it started not just creeping into DJ sets. I mean, a lot of DJ sets are just like this nowadays. Everybody plays, you know, a one-sound kind of DJ set. I would probably only put one or two tracks that's got this kind of mayhem in a set, but it depends again on the scope of the party, what time of night I would be playing, and so on. So, you know, this combination of qualities—that's kind of what I'm always looking to. And you know, what's the next combination? What's the what's the feature or the riff or whatever that's going to lead into the next one, which might not have all of the characteristics of the previous one. I think people tend to sort of match on a few too many characteristics, and then things can get same same. But you know, nothing same same about this track.

So I am gonna leave you now with Unconscious Collective's Fluorostani Transcendance. You can listen to the whole thing without my commentary. I'm Mark, DJ Solitaire. Thanks for tuning in. See you next time.
