Artist: Psychopod
Song: Psychopod & Dreampod
Year: 1996

Hey there, goa fans! Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 67 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. The last several episodes we've been looking at the '96-'97 season, starting roughly the autumn of '96 through to the summer of '97, mostly in the first part of that. We've done a few tracks that I came across in early '97. We're now going back to early in that '96 season, '96 to '97 sort of period into the autumn of '96, and we're going back to the that Return to the Source party in New York, the third weekend of September in '96, where I've shared already a few tracks that he or she played in his blinding closing set that was held at this science museum with, you know, this four-story high atrium with a glass ceiling, and if you've seen the first X Men movie. There's a part of it near the end that was filmed inside there when they're going up into the Statue of Liberty. But this is the building next to it, and what a party!

Now I've been waiting to feature this track because I was wanting to get a little bit of intel on it, and I did, thanks to Ian Ion, who was one of the two members of Psychopod, which was an offshoot of Koxbox, with Ian Ion and Frank'E (Frank Kiehn Madsen). Peter Candy was no longer in the project, and once again, just like with Total Eclipse and The Antidote, you know whose track from this compilation was also featured. The Phosphorescent compilation, incredible. TIP one that I got probably late September, I think it was early October '96. You know, much like Total Eclipse had signed to Blue Room, so they released using the name The Antidote for this compilation. Once Koxbox signed to Blue Room, of course everybody wanted some Koxbox tracks, so they said, okay, you know, we'll use another name, and they used Psychopod. Ian couldn't remember exactly how they came up with the name, but this track I remember very clearly as part of Tsuyoshi Suzuki's set because of these real, there's really incredible melting harmonies that are very, very distinctive, and I just remembered that vibe. And then once I heard, you know that CD. I was like, that was that track, just like I did with a few of them.

And so Ian shared just a few memories in our very long conversation, which we were talking a lot about, you know, early times in Goa and the music industry and the scenes and the creativity and all kinds of fantastic stuff. I wanted to share just a couple of those little memories, important key memories that he shared with us. So on the go, senior glasses. He said there was one of the main sounds from here comes from the Oberheim Xpander that was bought in '95 when he'd finished up with The Overlords and after the first Xbox album, forever after. He said he started being able to buy stuff because they were having some success. And he said, you know, when he heard this synth, he's like, "Oh, this is really something." And specifically, some filter modulation in here, and it provides this really, as he said, deep, rich, warm, fat sound. And so there's a specific kind of sound that he absolutely loved, which is one of the key components of this track. And he said, as a you know former guitarist, I finally had the feeling that a synth could have that kind of twang of an electric guitar, and so this is what started the track. And by the time they actually recorded this track, they had two of these Xpanders. So one was for doing those fat sounds, and another one was being used for other aspects. And this was the base of the the base of that basis of that track.

So Eventually, later on, another mix of this track and a really completely different version with a different title came out. They put it out on this beautiful look at that gorgeous artwork, just stunning, beautiful symbol. It's a single DreamPod. So what's interesting is you know the title Psychopod is the project name, but it's also the name of the track, right? Just like Total Eclipse had a track called Total Eclipse as well. Hallucinogen did not have a track called Hallucinogen. It was just LSD. So there's a Dream Pod and then Psychopod. So Psychopod is the one that Yoshi played, and I think it's the one that probably got played more. There's quite a different atmosphere with them, and we are going to listen to Psychopod, and I'm going to decide while I'm filming if I'm going to feature the entire Dreampod and listen to at least a little bit of it. I'm gonna decide while I'm filming if I'm gonna feature the entire Dream Pod. I'm gonna listen to at least a little bit of it, but I probably will because you know it's all good music.

Um, so yeah, so you're gonna hear those raw sounds that are really um quite important. There's in terms of I'll articulate a little bit of a difference now between these two tracks. The Psycopod one has a bit more of a granular kind of rougher offer sort of robust, you know, full-bodied kind of quality to it, and the DreamPod one, completely different structure, and some of the elements really have—they just create a different kind of storyline. So they show up in different places. There's some extra things added, but it's a more streamlined, fluid, really elegant kind of sonic landscape, so to speak, soundscape, I guess, which is a word I've used before, right? It's just this—the framework is different—and love them both. I've played them both, and but you know, the cyclopod one I wanted to feature because it's the one that really hit me as part of Toshi said. I can probably reconstruct all of the tracks that he played, you know, in New York. I've asked him to sort of see if he had the DAT. I don't think he's found that yet, or if it was even recorded. But boy, not going to forget that one in a hurry, since I haven't forgotten it, 27 and a half years later.

But why don't we listen to this fantastic first version of the track by Psychopod called Psychopod. Cool little aerated, listen to those aerated sounds and mysterious atmosphere. And then this riff, really important. And I just love the build up here, and it's going to get doubled up shortly. Again there's some little voices in the background here as well and there's the kick and then there's now we have an octave going up here just beautiful wonderful exciting build up and then there's going to be this explode and then all of a sudden you're just in the track. So that bass line. Love that. And again, voice-like quality going on here. Listen to that. There's some sounds in the background here that are going to show up in Stratosfear and Stratosfearless later on. I love that atonal kind of tweaking that's going on here. Right, so the tension is cranking up. Very interesting break, eh? Okay, well there's some little sounds going on, and then... Love that pick. Notice how the rhythm doesn't fit the beat exactly, so it changes its emphasis. Super playful and creative. Now gated voices. How many things are going on at the same time? That's sort of the interesting. Beautiful patterns. This also sounds a little bit of Acid Vol. 3, really early Koxbox, a little bit of the sound and riff. Man, just melt every time I hear this. Glistening jewel drops. And here, all the layers and how you know sometimes they have the same notes going on from different breaths, just compounding one another. Some of the rhythmic stuff going on in the upper registers, and now this gorgeous alien melody coming on here. So he had the aliens there, and then the humans reacting to it. I mean, just that kind of real, you know, really like the first track in the series, Stellium, you know, where you have this incredible alien voice beaming down a message to you. What a storyline! Notice those buildups. Creative structuring, eh? Notice how we're not just doing eight bar, eight bar, and everything here. Really outside-the-box construction here. One of the many ecstatic breaks. That woosh going up there. So it's again a kind of almost insistent exclamation. And how the voices interact, right, call and answer, and the alien voice comes back again. I love those murmuring voices. We're going to have this wonderful buildup here. There we go. And then there's the falling, there's that that comes out, and the answer, oop not there. Yeah, and then now that's sort of floating up above that other horse. Above that other voice, then another build-up to another section, another climax, and notice the rhythm that's going to come in here as well. Groovy, funky, psychedelic, completely out there, and then that melting going on up there. And then there's the answer up there. Really Close Encounters. That alien voice makes a re-appearance. Make sure you got the message. Notice the drum rolls, love those. Now it's going to start unwinding I need a little bit of something after listening to that one. Wow, really, just an absolute masterpiece. It really is just a whole other dimension in all meanings of the word—a quantum leap, I think. In terms of, I mean, there's the engineering, there's the, there's the storyline, the creativity, the, you know, there's still the regularity and the sort of, you know, the pulse and the way the storyline, you know, works in different sections. But then you have those creative transitions between, you know, really creative breaks between sections, you know, these transitional things, sort of like while you're turning the page, and the story's continuing, and just absolutely brilliant.

We might as well listen to the entire Dream Pod, don't you think? I mean, I was going to play just the introduction so you can hear, you know, the different the different introduction, you know, and sort of a framework for the sonic framework. But I think that you know, why not? This is just incredible music, and we want to hear it. So let's listen to the alternate. Don't we want to hear it? So let's listen to the alternate mix. And by the way, Ian also told me that you know Frankie always liked to have different mixes available, you know, for when they did their set. So that's kind of how this started out. And when I asked, you know, how the decision was made, like which one to include in the compilation, Ian couldn't remember. So you know, maybe the TIP folks just had—they had both of them. This is the one they chose. Regardless, of course they're both great, and we're going to listen to the DreamPod mix now.

Here we go. So notice how it starts off with this percussive, right, regular rhythm, and it just goes through these phases. There's that expander, the sort of mystical atmosphere, and then so really different kind of introduction, right? Very logical structuring as well. It's really just different. There's those murmuring voices again. Now we're gonna get the baseline. Sort of more murmuring kind of energy to this one. Some some textures in there. The kick start coming in here. Start slowly. Something starts it's building. It's a really long intro. There we go. It's been a while since I played this one. Right, so nice long intro, and then so we can recognize what we know from the previous one, but different framing, different flavor. The sounds are different. Again, that more streamlined, elegant kind of quality, I would say. Right. So even these rougher bits, a little bit more burnished, a little polished. Right. So really focused on that upper framework, and now some more lyrical. Some of the way those notes progress, just beautiful. Some of that lower bit there. Kick. Just the hypnotic sort of elements to that loop, right? So different effect, different sort of use of those notes, and it has a more upbeat quality to it. I think, still hypnotic, but you know, there's a naturally more sort of buoyant quality to this one. Plus, with that glass-like, mysterious flavoring, interesting drop, eh? And notice how it's not as quite as granular as in the other version. Nice buildup. Oh, next one. Just keeps you on your toes, right? Just not as predictable as a lot of what we hear now. And it's kind of a little bit unresolved. I think there's more tension here, right? Because it's sort of building up. A lot of energy's been building up in this version. So it's sort of like this: taking some other bits and just expanding on them a little bit more creatively sounds like a some of the live those live mix explorations rhythm and then. Right, so it's not the same use of those notes in terms of that melting sort of lyrical line in the previous one. Got some like almost helicopter-like sounds. Again, a little bit of a throwback to Acid Vol. 3, Harthouse. Again, there's a bit of a call and answer, right? This part, that bridge, and then. We should have the psychedelic yodel coming up shortly. And then there's that build up. Love the use of the kick there. Now it's not as rah-rah kind of climax there right still a little bit held back a little more strained lots more developing still. All right. So again, even that sound is still more polished. And now we're gonna go into one of the climactic voices and elements. Elements again that kind of call and answer but again it's not quite as over the top as the last one right the other one's uh this one feels a little bit more I want to say restrained but you know, a little bit more structured, and the other one's a little bit looser. And now we get, right? It's a long build-up before we get this alien voice and that lyrical melting quality. Then some different framing. A lot more gurgling going on in the background. Wonderful bounce to this. My goodness, the clarity is really exceptional. Now It starts really building. Nice little key change in that one upper voice, and then back down. Some texture is building up in that mid range as well. That upper sound too. Some sounds and flavoring we would hear when Koxbox would remix Slinky Wizard's track, Wizard. Wonderful morning feel. And that's. And that's sort of floating quality while there's that upper register stuff going on. There's too many layers! It's really interesting how this kind of doubles up some of what's happening with the lyrical part, but it emphasizes parts in a unique way. It's just gonna have a very beautiful lyrical conclusion again just sort of fade out hmm.

Wow. I mean, really, just beyond gorgeous. So different, right? Um, this is what's remarkable in terms of you know the creativity and the whole creative process. Uh, you know, hear Psychopod, oh oh my God, that's an amazing track. Listen to all those elements, and then you hear DreamPod. It's like, wait a second. Here's a bunch of those elements in a completely different storyline, different kind of engineering, different framework, and you know the way you get to some of those voices is different, and the way they express is different. And they are both fantastic. Wouldn't want to be without either of them, as I stated. You know, say the Psychopod Psychopod one is as for me, just the one that sort of pulls on the heartstrings a little bit more, just because of the memories of those, you know, the alien voice, just, you know, at the end of seven hours of this kind of music being beamed down to these Americans who had no idea what had hit them, you know, that kind of melody was just it just packed a punch, and just so with those ecstatic buildups as well, it was just absolutely the most, most incredible thing.

So, so there we go. So, extra long episode. Guess I have to feature both of those versions. So we are going to listen to them after I sign off here, one after the other. So I'm Mark DJ Solitare. Thanks for tuning into episode 67, and I'll leave you now with two tracks from this Dreampod EP by Psychopod. First, the title track Psychopod, and then the track Dream Pod. Thanks for tuning in. Thanks for watching!
