Artist: Eco
Song: UFOlk
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 68 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So today is the this is the first track featuring this particular artist, and there's a kind of Fascinating backstory here.

I first heard of the project Eco on the TIP Blue compilation, you know the blue one that's mostly pink on the cover, with a track called Toxic Recall. So that would have been in sort of early '96, and then by March fifteenth, '97, I got my hands. I'll tell you why I know the date in second on Psychic Deli Volume One. Can't find the cover or the CD of it right now. It's somewhere, and the last track on here by Eco is UFO, like UFO and folk, like folklore and people. It's kind of cool title.

So this track project Eco was actually produced. Sorry, the project Eco was actually Ott, as in not his name is not Otti as he's explained. His name is Ott, as in Otto without the O. Ott hit it big time. I think around 2004, when his incredible down tempo album Blumenkraft Craft came out untwisted and launched him from being somebody who was working behind the scenes in the studio. You can see him in some footage that was filmed in the mid '90s at Butterfly Studios. It launched him into, you know, being on stage and a major, internationally recognized producer.

Absolutely phenomenal album, and these tracks are also phenomenal, despite the fact that Ott hates them. To which there is an extra twist. He had no intention on these tracks ever being released. He just wrote them, you know, for a creative practice. He was not a fan of trance music, of Goa music. Just you know, he worked in the studio and he did his work there. And a somebody he knew, a co-worker or quote-unquote friend, basically took the tracks around to a bunch of labels and sold them, without knowing. And without, obviously, the labels didn't know either. The story came out afterwards, so he was naturally not Quite amused at finding that these tracks were released and somebody else got the money. As far as I know, that's how that happened. But yeah, so that was the story here.

So this one came out on, and you know, Psychic Deli, A.K.A. you know, tied in with Phantasm. And John Phantasm told me, you know, you know that he was presented with a number of the tracks, so I think the probably the one on TIP might have gone out earlier, or it might just depend on when these finally came out. But he said, you know, he was presented with a few tracks. He liked UFO the best, and that's the one that he took, and then the other ones ended up elsewhere.

So now Ott did produce and consent to the release of another track that showed up in I think it was Unusual Suspects two on Twisted records, and that was due to me. I came across a CD at Maestro Posford's place in might have been 2004, and I just remember there were three tracks, and it said they were by Ott. And I listened to them; these are unbelievable. Why are these not out? And I was writing press releases for Twisted Then, as I am now, and was sent a demo possibility of the Unusual Suspects, Volume Two, lineup, and I said, "What about a track by Ott? Wouldn't that be amazing? I mean, I heard there's three amazing ones." And so Simon Holton, who's running the show, went and he chose this one. So Hikikomori was—I can't even remember if it's the project name or the track name—but there we go. Anyway, that one was showed up on a Twisted compilation. I think it's a banger. I think all of the all of them are. The other two, which I don't have, incredible. And Ott doesn't like any of them. He consented to that release at least, though.

So thank you for that, Ott, and also, thank you for producing this fantastic music that you don't like. And I'm really sorry, obviously, that came out in such a nefarious way.

And I've played a couple of these tracks, quite a few times. This one, the most, out of all of the eco tracks. I think this is absolute magic. It's a nighttime stormer. It's dark and mysterious, but also expansive and anguished. And it's got just got, you know, one of those tracks where I talk about I've talked about before. You know, there's a complex combination of emotions, which is very much like the human experience. And I just think it's absolutely phenomenal. Not a particularly long one, about six and a half minutes, and a very cool, sneaky introduction and also outro that makes for really great, you know, DAT style ambient mixing, very atmospheric, and it can be mixed, of course, with kick as well. And then, you know, the layering can be really wonderful.

So I think I should stop talking for now until we start the music, and then I'll start talking again over it before I present it after at the end without my blabbering. So here we are with UFO by Eko.

So this opening, just here, it's like this whisper, this sort of fading, and this sound that sort of creeps into the space. Now, a lot of DAT mixing at the time used to be like, you know, you can imagine there was the the whole, all of the music was this cloud of information that came onto the dance floor, and then when it was done with its message, it would move away. And this kind of introduction really works well for creating this kind of atmosphere.

So we've got these metallic kind of you know voices and machine-like sounds, and then this rhythm. That one note that goes that goes up, and then this rush that comes in. Again, a little voice-like, and then the kick comes in. There's kind of all this mysterious kind of questioning, this brooding quality to this, you know, that higher riff that's going on up there. And then... Get a variation of that. And there's going to be this brilliant break as it builds up and then crashes in. You know that real nighttime kind of like explosive, you know, tunnel vision kind of experience.

There's kind of this oscillating that's going on here, you know, sort of back and forth, left and right, on and off. It's really almost like this sort of electrical storm kind of quality. It's really phenomenal. Listen to how all of those different sounds are, you know, those sinewy, smooth sounds contrast and offset this rhythmic stuff. And then again, and then you know these great intervals that we find in this music, and then we get that little shift up, and then it comes back down. That little question, almost with that one note, and then, and we get that extra riff going on there.

Notice that texture, how it's you know almost doubling up with a different voice and adding some more texture, and then that little break, and then. Back into this whole swirly cloud of electromagnetic information that's sort of spiraling around the dance floor just absolutely hypnotic while also being uplifting and introspective and get all of the... The figuration that I thought was coming in earlier, just the tension of that.

Again, this one's getting louder now. It's more insistent. This spiraling sound. Here we've got, you know, that exclamatory, that sort of anguished, you know, what's going on and why is this happening, kind of thing, which many of us have thought on the dance floor before. Hopefully for more existential reasons as opposed to why is this DJ playing this. Certainly not the case here.

And so it's like that cloud of information, you know, it's communicated what it needs to, and now it goes away. Wow! I mean, just the kind of nighttime music that is not being made anymore in many respects. Again, that combination of anguish and uplifting.

So it's you know this is not like a cheery, happy kind of track, right? It's pretty deep and dark, but it's got direction and still got up that's going on. And so again, this is where there's this unique and really fascinating blend of elements that seem to be contradictory but are really complementary.

I can't remember at this point if I told the story of how I know I had this by March '97, and that is because Ollie played at Tyson Street, played that four-hour set that I've talked about when we did, you know, Shitty Stick and a couple of other tracks, and Antaro, who founded Spirit Zone, played after him, and he played this track. And somebody went running up to Ollie saying, "What is this track? Do you know what this track is?" And he's like, "I don't know," and I was like, "Well, actually, I know," and I told him, and he wrote it down, and he was very happy. So you're welcome.

And there we are. So also interesting that you know not every DJ knew every track that was around, right? All I knew, of course, a lot of tracks, but not this one.

I've played this a lot. It's in my Spectrum set from May 23rd, 98. That's the first party I played at under the name Solitaire in Tokyo. This is what I remembered to hit at the point in my set when I remembered to hit record after a very confusing start to the set. We'll check all the equipment, folks.

And I've played it several times since, and it's just it's an all time favorite again for that blend of emotions. The fantastic, you know, I mean, really, this is great under the stars, and you know, sort of, you know, looking at you know the vastness of space when you have these sounds swirling around. But also great in a club. An absolutely brilliant track, whether you think so or not, ought.

And again, it ought not to have been released that way, pun fully intended. But in a sense, Musically, existentially, I'm glad that it was. Although, you know, this again really nefarious way for this to happen.

So I will sign off. A bit of a shorter episode today, but after the massive one last week, and there is a doozy coming up next week. So stay tuned for that, and stay tuned for as I sign off the full track without my commentary. Mark DJ Solitaire signing off here from episode 68 of Retrogoa Explorations and leaving you now with a wonderful track by Eco, aka UFOK.
