Artist: Hallucinogen
Song: Snakey Shaker
Year: 1997

Hey there Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 75 of a Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which in every episode I share one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And after a break for the summer festivals here in the summer of 2024, we are back in musically, the 96-97 season, so roughly September 96 through to August of 97, and this is a track from one of my all-time favorite producers.

When I moved to London, this is the number one person who I really wanted to meet, whose music I just absolutely adored and revered, someone who you know. As soon as I heard, as soon as I heard his music, I was just like, "There's something different here, and I'm into it." And this is Hallucinogen. So Simon Posford.

Now I've talked about how in September '96, you know, I moved to London to get more involved in the scene. Three weeks later, I ended up in new York at this unbelievable party at a science museum, and that was the first time I heard Hallucinogen. And he played a number of tracks there that I heard for the first time, among them Gamma Goblins and also the remix of Snarling Black Mabel. That the original had been quite a favorite of mine. Then I was like, oh, this is different.

And at that party, I also met this fab young lady, Maria, and I saw her again at a month later at that huge party at Adrenaline Village of Siochi's, this Mtsurii party called Zentricity, and that was the party at which Simon premiered, at least the first time I heard "The Loin Sleeps Tonight," which was the track in episode 74. Well, you know, back in the day, pre- Facebook and all of that, you would just, you know, you'd see people at parties who weren't always in regular contact. And so, you know, the second time seeing Maria, and third time I saw Maria was at a party. Can't remember where or what it was, but it was at some party in December of '96. And she's like, oh, Simon's over here. We started dating. It's like no way. So she introduced me to Simon, and you know, loud parties and so on, not the easiest place to have a conversation or so on. But got to see him say hello and so on.

And Maria was always really, really supportive, and I think she saw my my passion for music and my interest, and I'm sure I probably elaborated on about you know what it is that I like about different artists, and so she wanted me and Simon to get to know each other, which of course eventually did happen. But there was this one occasion. I think they were just driving past my you know neighborhood. Maria had come over before, and she said, "Oh, why don't we drop in on Mark?" And you know called me up. That I actually had a mobile phone. Can you believe in '97? Had one of those. They had them back in the day. Dumb phones, not smart ones, like a brick.

And in any case, they came over, and Simon's like, "Oh, I've got a new tune," and plopped this cassette in the cassette player. I know, trust me, it was. I was. I know what you're thinking, and I was thinking the same thing. And out comes, of course, the most unbelievable, "What the heck am I listening to?" Kind of tune. And it's my favorite track on the second Album, which came out, I think it's the fall of '97, but this is definitely quite a bit earlier, and it was Snakey Shaker.

And I just remember listening, and you know, I've talked before about the difference when you hear something on a big system and when you listen on small speakers. But you know, I'm there with Simon standing next to me, and I'm looking at these speakers on my desk and saying, "What the hell is going on here? What the heck am I listening to?" You know, once the track was finished, she's like, "I left the cassette back." Of course, I was going to give it back, but it was also, you know, that same thing with the doof DAT at at Seo She's party. It's like it's going away.

Yeah, this was this track Immediately stood apart for me for several reasons. There's a passion and a drive to it that's really remarkable. There's incredible tension, and I think some of this is due to this experimentation that Simon was doing here, which is something that nobody had done before, and I don't think anyone's really done since.

In this track, which is four on the floor, as most tracks are, right? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, right? So four, four. There's a five-note pattern spread across three beats, and out of the five notes, the middle three are on offbeats, so they're not on the strong beats, not on the one, two, three, four, right? If you're counting one and two and three and four, for the and would be the midpoint, and anything on that midpoint or even between those, because you can divide them, right? Those quarter notes, as they're called, you can divide them into eighth notes, as also sixteenth notes, right? So you can get all these other notes in between those. So notes two, three, two, three, four out of the five notes are on the offbeat, but the pattern is spread across three of the four beats and then repeats. So it repeats three times before it lands on a strong beat again.

I realize this is technical, but it is. When you listen to it, you're going to realize this is why something's going on. And it took me a while to be able to figure out the counting. Now I'm going to count it out, and it's going to be a little bit incorrect because when I say the numbers two, three, four, there, that's actually not on those beats. But if I just use the and, it wouldn't make sense. So the count is important. So the pattern goes one, two, three, and four. One, two, and three. Four, one, and two. Three, four, and one. So then it lands on the one again. So I've got one and in there. I'm counting it out as four, but it's basically it's five notes, and technically the two, three, four are end ones. They're not on the strong beat, as far as I can ascertain. It is really hard to decode this.

So what's happening is you get this pattern that happens three times before it falls on a strong beat again. Now, not the same thing as triplets. I will eventually get into triplets with a producer who you would not expect was one of the first ones to work triplets, but not a fan of how they're done now. Really a fan of this first exploration of that, which will be coming. But this is different. It's not triplets, but it's a three beat riff that's set across four beats, and so it has to repeat three times before it lands on the strong note again.

Now, I'm going to give you one of the big classical music secrets from the greatest teacher of classical music in the 20th century. One of them certainly, Nadia Boulanger, who taught pretty much everybody who made a big, big, big name in Europe and some in the United States. She said that one of the biggest mistakes people make is to accent a strong beat because it's already strong, and the real flow and an impulse comes from accenting offbeats. Now you don't accent it so you distort the melodic line, because you know what it's like in English. If you accent the wrong syllable, it's going to sound strange, isn't it? Right? I mean that sounds ridiculous. So there's a natural flow.

But what happens here is we're having this cycle of just the strong beats being accented, with other ones being exited, and it really keeps the momentum going. Plus, I think the added ingredient, the good old secret ingredient, is the fact that there's the producer's passion and interest and curiosity and creativity. Hey, let's try something different, right? And not just try something different and it's crap. I mean, it's like sure, lots of people can try something different. It's not necessarily really good. This is great, right? So try something different with some of what we already know, right?

And we've got the Hallucinogen, we've got the Hallucinogen, some signature Hallucinogen harmonies and patterns and storytelling, plus some of the new sounds that he was using, right? Where you have that sort of warbling voice-like sound that started coming out in Deranger, and that we have in Gamma Goblins and so on. That it would become one of the foundations of some of the Shpongle tracks as well, so that's all going on with these incredible major minor harmonies, these very catchy riffs, and that unbelievable rhythmic, you know, five note three beat pattern that is just a jaw dropper.

So yeah, so there I was, right? This real like kind of you know party kid, you know, idolizing this guy who's like, oh my god, I can't believe Maria brought Simon to my living room, and that thing is coming out of my cassette, and I was just like, what the heck? So this has always been my favorite track, not just because of you know the circum those circumstances, though of course you know you can imagine. I mean, there's lots of great stuff on here, but but I definitely I always thought this track just stood apart, and this is the crowning glory for me.

By the way, I remember first time I saw a copy of this was at I think it was the first weekend of August '97. I know, I know my memory. Blue Room held a party at Kentish Town Hall, which was it was one station away from me. I was actually able to walk there, and it was amazing because there were all these A-listers who somehow in August didn't have a gig that night, and so any you know anybody who wasn't playing at this party was there. So I remember Coxbox played live Extreme, I think, or Extreme and Total Eclipse were on the lineup, and I know one of them somehow weren't able to they weren't able to be there, Dino played the closing, played the closing set. Mike McGuire played, and I was there with Toshi, who very rarely, I mean, didn't you know, rarely had a weekend off. And I remember Simon was there, and Martin Man With No Name, and a few others.

But I remember that was the first time I saw a copy of you know the promo of this, and we were there with Warwick Saint, who did some of the photography. I'm not sure if he did this or some of the Photoshop. But Warwick has since become one of the most iconic fashion photographers on the planet. I mean, he's worked with everybody: Beyonce, J Lo, everyone. Major, major photographer. I last saw him at the first Shpongle live at the Roundhouse in 2008.

So in any case, so I remember Simon had copies of this. Worked out one then. I didn't. I had to wait a little bit until I got one. But yeah. So Snakey Shaker. Long story short, you know, I heard it first in the 96-97 season. I think it was released more 97-98. I didn't check the release date for the album. But we are going to listen to this unbelievable track.

Beautiful, dramatic, orchestral introduction , and then holy moly, all the horses run out of the stable all at once, and it is wild. Here we go with Hallucigenes' Snaky Shaker.

So this kind of orchestral, dramatic introduction, similar to "Inspired." We've got this from '95. I love those chimes. I've got this flanging wave going on, and just this movement between these two notes, and then well, inquisitiveness there. And then notice the rhythm that's going to come up here . Drive, and then we have this just classic sound, really dramatic impulse drive, and you know this was every Hallucinogen track back then for me. It had like there's a harmonic, there's like a riff, like a chord, and it really seemed to just unlock these patterns of consciousness, and just keeps repeating.

And then get that more orchestral Backing up another octave. There's some different intervals coming in. Very soft, but hard to hear. Then Different voicing again. I just love the way it's you know it's repeated, comes in with different voicing. It just adds this extra, you know, are you getting the message kind of vibe.

Then, now we get this famous voice effect, you know that we had in Derranger, Gamma Goblins, and the you know, really foundational part of the Spangol tracks and other Hallucinogen ones, of course. And now we're going to start having that syncopated pattern coming in pretty shortly. Love those sort of weird atmospheric noises, and then. What the heck is going on, and then there's all this other trumpeting going on in the background.

Isn't the rhythm of that, I mean, you know, in a larger system, this is really going to spiral out. And four, one, two, and three, four, one, and two, three, four, and one. And again, it's got that extra voicing. All those, also those weird atmospheric noises. Now we've got it going on with that crazy, crazy voicing.

And again, you know we're gonna get this real spirally kind of effect, and just that rhythmic pattern just completely throws you off your normal axis. The storytelling of this, right? The way that voice goes through this pattern, this rhythmic pattern goes through all these different evolutions.

And then this. This, again, the importance of the message, right? There's this real drive, this incredible passion. And we get all those great whooshes that are starting to happen like sounds like the fabric of time and space is ripping apart like it's here Another one.

And again, we've got that trumpeting in the background. Now we've got it with the voices. So they all start coming together. All these different things that were presented, and then poof, it's all happening at once. Again, what a great way to take it. I mean, you really need to catch your breath after that, right?

So other patterns continue while the kick drops out, and then. This was completely revolutionary, right? We had never heard this kind of sound before, combined with that rhythm. Notice the bassline here. A little bit some memories of Old Infinity Project there. Get more of those whooshes. Gonna hear this voice more at the end. This kind of background sound that's coming in here. Laser zaps. We need more laser zaps, folks.

And light up a cigarette after that one. What the heck was that? That was the vinyl mix, by the way, which is you know unmixed, so I that's what I use for DJing. Other than the one where it's sometimes harder to blend when there's two other tracks coming in, you know, at the end of the other one.

Ooh, okay. I mean, really, for me, that is just one of the all time all time greats. Really creative, really pushing the envelope musically and creatively. And again, that passion, that drive, you know, really back at a time when those of us who had been in the scene for at least a couple of years still really had this whole, you know, there's something important here. There's something that you know this music is about that's important, and you know, shifting our consciousness and everybody coming together and sharing these moments.

And I think for the producers as well, those who are pushing boundaries and pushing their own boundaries and figuring out what else can we do musically that's good, not just let's just do something different just for the sake of different. You know, there was this whole cohesive aspect to pushing the envelope musically, and I think Simon checked off All the boxes with this one. It is just an absolute masterpiece.

I think a little bit overlooked perhaps, because of course you know Gamma Goblins got a lot of play. The second mix here, I actually prefer the first mix. There's all kinds of great stuff on here though. Dimension, absolutely phenomenal. Hologram is I think my other big favorite from here. But Snaky Shaker, all time masterpiece, and one that I'll let you listen to now without me counting and gesturing and speaking over it.

So I'm Mark DJ Solitaire signing off here from episode 75 of Retro Go Explorations, leaving you now with a complete masterpiece by Hallucinogen Snaky Shaker.
