Artist: GMS
Song: Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 78 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share, in every episode, one of my favorite tracks from the Goa trance psychedelic dance movement of the 1990s. We are still in the 96-97 season, that really pivotal time where lots of new projects And new styles of production and sounds were really coming to the fore, and this is the first time to cover this project that really ended up becoming one of the megastars of this movement for many, many years, still somewhat in a different form. And I remember very clearly when I first started Hearing their music, and when the first album came out, and when this particular track came out, and all of that.

So, I have talked before about this one time that I played at a sort of a very small outdoor gathering. We're talking really ten or fifteen people, and when I played "X-Dream’s “Create Your Own Happiness” and that fellow there was saying, "Oh, this is like a clarion call to everybody." And I also played that Transwave track, Absalom, when I got to sort of rub the nose of a French fellow who didn't like Transwave, but he loved that track. And so this fellow who made the “clarion call” comment was involved With a German-Israeli label that ended up putting out the first album by Growling Mad Scientists, or GMS. And I mean, the label had this very interesting sort of symbol name, sort of it was all like in these sort of alien hieroglyphics.

But it was—I need to sort of look up the Name actually, because I never even knew it was Hadshot Haheizar. So it was a German-Israeli label, and this fellow Steve was really—he's known as Cosmic Steve. Fabulous, fabulous fellow. Really passionate about the music, and very existential, and really, you know, into the whole spiritual side of things.

And he played at this event, event, right? Little Gathering, and just remember hearing all this unbelievable music, and I was like, "What the heck is going on here?" And at this point, I should have already had—I think it was on—I had the promo of Resonance Mood, which came out a couple of months later, and Jaws by GMS had been licensed for that, and you know he Wasn't particularly thrilled because he really just wanted, you know, everything on this, and he was really on this this mission. And then soon after that, around that time, and it was released in May '97. Tip 3D had another GMS track on it, and that's the one that we're going to be looking at today.

But this is, you know, this was the first Experience that I had with GMS, and it was through Steve's playing of this music that I first heard this, and I'm like absolutely blown away by the incredible music and how he was presenting it. And he played a few amazing tracks by other folks that, again, I'll be dipping into once we get to those particular tracks. But Now, GMS generally Riktam and Bansi, right, are the two, the two were the two headliners for the longest time. There were other members of the project as well, and this particular track was written by Riktam, Bansi, and Yacov Biton.

So Riktam and Bansi were living in Amsterdam, got into electronic Music left high school, and they went to Goa and got you know totally sucked into this particular kind of music. And they were DJing at clubs before they were legal, so they had to be like you know snuck in and out of the side or back entrances. And but it was when they heard Goa stuff that they were just like, okay, this is it. And they devoted themselves fully to their craft, and Came out with his album in 1997, Chaos Laboratory, absolutely incredible music.

Now they became major headliners because, of course, they were writing incredible music, and so they they moved over to TIP Records, and then they moved to Ibiza in '97, I believe it was, and and so you know, and for for many many years, and still active, except that you know, of course, sadly, Bansi Passed away several years ago. Riktam is still very active, and just incredible music. Now they moved into, you know, a lot of their later music, and what started evolving was, you know, really fun stuff, really uplifting, wild, crazy, psychedelic, you know, really fun stuff. And I think a lot of the time it's really easy to miss the depth that can exist in fun stuff, and also the fun that can exist in deep stuff.

You know, I think, like I've talked about, you know, the fact that there's a range of emotions in human experience, and something that we have in this music, I think, is more than one mood simultaneously, and that's what I get particularly from this album And a lot of their later stuff. I think it's not all the same character as one might think. It's easy to sort of get into, you know, well, all of this, this particular sound or that particular sound. You know, I've played more GMS than people would expect because people know me for, you know, some deeper stuff and melodic stuff and so on.

And this particular track, " Do androids dream of electric sheep? It's definitely one that I've played relatively recently in an online set. The last block I played at Uppsala in 2023, unbelievable one. Really, again, a lot of depth with all of this spacey, wizzy, otherworldly kind of stuff.

I'm just incredible. But do androids dream of electric sheep? Sticks in my head because I'm now I'm not sure when I actually got my hands on it , but the Tip World, sorry, this it wasn't Tip World, sorry, the Tip 3D CD came out was May nineteenth, ninety seven. May twenty fourth or twenty fifth was when there was that a return to the source party in Japan, Where I talked about Siochi playing as a child, we could walk on the ceiling when you know it was just starting to get lighter and we were above the clouds.

So this track got played at that party by Keisuke, who was with Matsuri and was you know a DJ for them, playing quite a lot in Japan and internationally. And he left DJing Because he had the you know the family tradition of becoming a sushi chef, and he is you know a he is a sushi chef, and I got to meet him finally after a really long time, about a decade ago, at an outdoor gathering in Japan, and it was just wonderful to see him after so many years. But I used to see him all over the place in London and Japan and so on, and Paris as well. That particular time when I heard Tsuyoshi Suzuki in Paris, so I knew Keisuke very well.

And this party, the way it started off, I just I'm really wanting to set the stage because the impact that this track had, I think, is a really big part of how I got to experience it for the first time, and which again relates to the depth that it has. So this Return to the Source party started off like we were in the clouds. Remember, I talked about being above the clouds. Well, we were in the clouds, and it's very wet in clouds.

It was dismal. It was miserable. We were in the fog, and we were just sort of like, okay, this party could just be a complete washout. It was arranged by Rainbow 2000, who later became known as Raincoat 2000, because it seemed like nature was always rebelling against them.

But the Japanese partiers just danced, danced, danced. They did not care about the rain. And while Keisuke was playing, like the clouds parted and this moon illuminated Mount Fuji on the side of the dance floor. I'm getting goosebumps just talking about this.

And you know, I remember going down to the dance floor, And I think it was I started to the DJ booth, and I think it was while he was playing this, and he was just he was he was bawling, he was crying throughout his entire set. It was absolute magic, and it was just like you know the force of the people just you know going for it no matter what. There's this adversity. This isn't what we want.

It's rainy. It's gross. It was muddy. They didn't care.

There's this amazing music. We're outside. We're in Nature, Mount Fuji's over there, even though we can't see it because it's in the clouds. And then poof, the clouds clear.

There's this moon illuminating the side of Fuji. I don't have any photos of it from that, unfortunately, from at nighttime. But I do have some wonderful daytime shots. And holy moly, it was just something.

So during that set, in the kind of you know one thirty-ish kind of time, he dropped. Thirty-ish kind of time, he dropped "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep," and it was just like we were in a dream. It was absolutely incredible, and this track still, for me, holds a really special place in my heart. So, we are going to listen to that one.

So here we are with Growling Mad Scientists’ “Do "Androids Dream of Electric Sheep." Do Androids Dream of electric sheep. Just some basic background noise, and this, these are the sounds that I just love and miss. Really electronic, otherworldly kind of sounds. Pretty fast.

Notice how this goes from not having any Tone to having some note value, and listen to this rapid fire baseline, rubbery bounce, and then just whoosh noises. That's the melody until this one comes in. Really like Alien voices, right? And this very interesting conversation going on behind between all of these beings.

This is like the other one was like the question. This is the answer. Even that bassline sounds like a voice. If you listen to it, then this insistent message Over here, that's just hammering away at you and starting to change sound, becoming more and more like a voice.

And again, another kind of loop. Listen to all of the interplay between all of these sounds. Again, it's Just it all becomes voices on a big system, and in that psychedelic frame of mind, just the chaos. No wonder they it's called the Chaos Laboratory.

This is again the kind of sound that we would start to really associate with GMS. But listen to the voice in it. And this harmonic melodic germ. Well, there's some other voices.

How many different sounds at the same time, right? Wonderful. Wonderful irregular rhythmic pattern there. Really playful, which of course is what we especially came to associate with GMS.

Very E.T. otherworldly sounding. Now we have more of these voices all coming together. Lots of call and response here.

Beautiful pause here, but that bass line is still just really gets in there. Earworm. More voices.

While that insistent bit starts boring in, all of a sudden this is all upbeat and jubilant. Love the detached staccato quality to those notes. Love the rhythm with that. No idea what he's saying.

At this part here, this is where everything just soars. Phone. Answer. There's so much spontaneity, and yet there's still such an incredible storyline when you look at it really in the big picture.

So we hear, you know, all of those riffs really starting to play together, and they really become like this unified story. Voices. The voices. Slow build here.

I'm starting to head into the big climax. Introduced a build. Getting that wonderful rhythm. Again, that wonderful rhythm.

That voice comes in now. Now that one finally makes a reappearance. Really, there's this incredible lightness to the textures, huh? And yet it's so uplifting and so powerful, but also deep.

Just all these layers happening simultaneously. Happening simultaneously. I love the rhythm of this bit. It's just really highly placed and not super in the foreground.

I'm just gonna start preparing to for the outro Where the DJ would mix into the next track. I mean, wow. So you can imagine, I think, sort of hearing that outdoors with a full moon, you know, it really, literally, was just like the clouds just seemed to part all of a sudden, and then, you know, it was absolutely incredible. So, for me, this track is always going to be associated with this unbelievably, you know, cosmic-like experience.

Being on the dance floor, having you know this celestial illumination coming and illuminating, You know this giant, you know energy vortex, you know extinct volcano in Japan, while we end up above the clouds, and just absolutely magical track by GMS that was just played so memorably on that occasion by Kiske, and has just since been a major favorite. But the entire album, and you know so much GMS . Really, I think you know, I'm going to go through and just re-listen to everything at this point. I had some special unreleased ones on DAT that a couple that were never released that I think are some of the best stuff, to be honest.

But this album, which again, Cosmic Steve, You know, debuted. I think, at this tiny little gathering, and just one killer after another. And I just remember, you know, my head just exploding, with this unbelievably cutting-edge music. And it was a really new sound.

It was a new avenue and exploration. And they just did it better than anybody else. At this point, it was just, you know, incredible. And they were so young at the time that they were doing this.

So, hats off, gentlemen! Absolutely phenomenal production. I will sign off here, and then we get to listen to, without any interruption or commentary, the complete "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" by Growling Mad Scientists. than that, scientists.
