Artist: Deflo
Song: Tio Mate
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 82 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So today's track is the first one featuring this particular artist who did not produce a lot of tracks, but holy moly, they are amazing! And there is such a wonderful backstory. And I've been in touch with the producer first time we had never met back in the day.

But this track made a huge impact on me when I got my grubby little hands on it on that promo CD, the first pre-release CD That I got my hands on, thanks to John Perloff, actually the manager of Mitsuri, when he gave me, not in this case, but clear vinyl sleeve, this Resonance Mood compilation, which ended up looking really different when it when it was released. But you know, Tsuyoshi Suzuki was at the time really into breaking the boundaries and those limitations of Goa trance, right? And it was either this CD or another one that actually said something like Goa trance is dead. And I think the intention there was really the fact that things were getting too boxed in for a scene that is supposed to be really about breaking boundaries. And so, I mean, in this compilation, he certainly did that, and it was really, really memorable, and still is in so many ways.

And so, this track was the first time I heard this artist, and it is just the track is just so unbelievably different from absolutely anything else. I mean, it does a really, there's a really wonderful flow with the whole sequencing here, which is kind of again the case. This beautiful storyline on on these compilations, and so this one that we're going to be listening to is by Deflo, who is that's the project name of Laurent Deflo. So if you take a look at his name, Deflo Deflo Deflo, there you go. In French, I mean, they also abbreviate McDonald's as McDo, right? So, cool little abbreviation.

And I'm not pronouncing the name of the track yet because it's been mispronounced all this time. I reached out to him, and he has been incredibly gracious with wonderful insights. Apparently, I'm the only one who ever asked him what the deal was with this track. And the title of the track, spelled "Tio Mate," which is how everybody pronounced it, is not how it's pronounced. It's Spanish, and it comes from this William S. Burroughs book that Laurent said had a huge impact on him. And it's pronounced "Tio Mate," according to my Mexican trance consultant Patricio Trom. Thank you, buddy.

And you know, you turn to page twelve, and they bring in reinforcements to the faltering lower balcony. Teomates talks out, followed by his adolescent Caelmono. Trans fans will recognize that title as well as another Deflo production. So, so there we go. William S. Burroughs is the source for that. The pronunciation is Tio Mate, not Taomate, which is how everybody was pronouncing it, and that everybody had no clue. And to be honest, really, everybody had no clue what to make of this track when it hit because it was so unbelievably like in another whole other style and dimension and everything. It was absolutely perfect for what Tsuyoshi Suzuki was aiming for, and mission accomplished.

So when I, I mean, when I first got this compilation, of course, I listened to everything and was just blown away. And then my local French mafia chapter president, who is living in my neighborhood, Emeryk, who is a good friend of Chris Kylevin, he came over for a listening and trading session, and we sat. We didn't sit actually. I think we were standing most of the time, in front of the speakers, listening to one track after another. And this one, I just remember both of us being like, you know, in that TV commercial. I think it's a Memorex or I don't know what, where he's sort of like sitting in the armchair and sort of just being completely lasted. I just remember at the end of this track, where this voice trails off, we were both like, I mean, it's just, it's completely blasted into another dimension, and there's just, there's so much going on.

But I want to share some of the wonderful insights that Laurent was gracious enough to share with us, and thank you so much for this. Um, so let's start off. At the time, I was working at the training center for show technicians, and I had bought myself a rather cheap kit to produce sound at night at home. One of the students at the school who had just started a label heard one of my test mixes and suggested that I release it. So I eventually produced "Kaiel Mono" on Paname Records. Who knows if it's Paname? My first release and the second of the label. It was very well received on Radio FG Fréquence Gay by Patrick Ronion, who played the title every day. We also started to hear the DJs were playing the record: Goa Gil, Sid Shanti, James Monro, etc.

One day, I came home from work and I got a message from someone who spoke English by imitating the Japanese accent, and I got a good laugh because all my friends knew that Tsuyoshi Suzuki was my favorite DJ producer, and I thought it was a joke from one of my friends. Apparently, it wasn't. I never found out how he got my number. So that's how this track came to be made.

So a little bit more background: when I started making music at home in late '95, I didn't have the idea of producing records. In the mid '80s, I had realized that I didn't enjoy myself being on stage, and I stopped being in bands, post-punk, Industrial, etc. I did not try to get my tracks heard or contact any label. It just happened, just like that. And I've thought ever since that music itself had to go somewhere, and even with its imperfection, it found a way, in a manner of speaking. The fact that fact is that after about two years, the circle was closed, and I left that behind me. This explains why I didn't want to play live. I liked the parties, even if not a dancer. Trance Body Express, Gaia, Return to the Source, etc. But I had discovered this kind of event at the mythical Mozinor in the early 90s, a few years before.

So soon after Tsuyoshi's proposal, I set up my gear in my best friend's attic. I had set up an igloo tent in the room, and I would sleep there when my eyes started to close in front of the Atari. I used a Akai S3200 sampler. I used a Akai S3200 sampler, an Novation Bass Station, Nord Lead, and a Yamaha CS-30. I worked for months on this one track because I was touring a lot of the time, and I must say that when I was alone with the machines, I'd go totally nuts. To be fair, I have to admit that I was never able to respect the deadlines when it came to delivering the tracks to Matsuri. I'm not very proud of that. Sorry, Tsuyoshi Suzuki.

For the record, the triggered reversed voice sample came from those commercials and jingles at the beginning of "I Can See for Miles" on The Who Sell Out album. And as a child, I never had music theory lessons. Pretty wild, eh? And there's also some samples from a musique des pygmées Bibiak, like basically pygmy music, that's in there as well.

So really interesting and rich background. And I have to say that you know from my classical work as well, I've often found that the musicians who don't seek the limelight or sometimes actively avoid it are often the ones who really truly deserve it. And of course, it doesn't mean that the ones who are there don't deserve it. And deserve is a bit of an odd word, but in any case, not to get bogged down by that, I do find it interesting that you know, again, this guy produced just a few tracks and then just decided, okay, this is it, you know. And Nick Doof as well, you know, he did all of that for years, and then he's like, no, I'm turning the corner, I'm going to do something else, and just you know that that particular chapter is closed.

So with this track, you know, I always thought that there was a whole lot that sounded like gunfire happening in this track. And what's interesting about this character Tio Mate is he's an assassin. Let me just find the page. Tio Mate is an old assassin with twelve deer on his gun. A thin, ghostly an elderly old man with eyes the color of a gray, faded gray flannel shirt. He wears a black suit with a black stetson. Under the coat, a single-action Smith and Wesson tip-up .44 with a seven-inch barrel is strapped to his lean flank. Tio Mate wants to put another deer on his gun before he dies.

So, I'll be pointing out the gunfire. I think you might start to recognize it. It really takes on actually a Tarantino-esque quality here because it's just so incredibly over the top that it's just it's just magnificent. Again, it's like a you know where the trance music was really I think always, and here especially we're starting to see branching out into different kinds of sounds and different territories, and how they can all really fit in a story.

So, with all of that background, let's listen to the whole like, what the heck am I listening to? Incredible production by Deflo Tio Mate. Very operatic, dramatic atmosphere. Right. Incredible. Incredible. I mean, this anguish and this sort of chorus, this very operatic quality. Love this riff. Combination of the voice with that, and then this incredible sound coming. And honestly, the first time I put this on, I just didn't know what hit me. And then this build up here, that chorus. I mean, it's like again that sort of ancient Greek chorus, you know, presenting something really dramatic, very operatic, very orchestral. Those those sounds. I mean, this was really cutting edge at the time. It's just this massive sonority in that lower frequency, and voices everywhere.

Again, keep in mind that kind of assassin sort of, you know, this really very dark. And you know, this sounds for me more less kind of Western, but more again this really futuristic atmosphere, which actually does tie in with the with the William S. Burroughs. And the rhythm of that riff is really catchy as well. Super futuristic, and there's a robotic voice there as well. Get, you know, not a whole lot of different rips, but there's this incredible storyline that's being created already from these.

And what's interesting for me, I mean at the time, it it I thought it was German. I mean it really has this kind of German operatic, Wagneresque kind of thing, but also that sort of hard German, you know, kind of you can imagine those nightclub in Hamburg where everybody's in black dancing to this. That sort of hammering, that sort of has a bit of a machine gun kind of sound to me. A little break here for these chopped-up voices here, the frequency is beautiful there.

And now we're going to get this incredible buildup. Such a catchy riff, and then this is the Tarantino moment here it's just like almost comical how like this intensity is absolutely incredible incredible. Beautiful three note riff there, then, and that comes back again. Super hypnotic riff. Monodic riff. Famous rhythm. This insistence. Very clever little shift in direction again, just organic storytelling.

Alrighty then, some robotic voices and then back to that one. There's the interplay between that human voice and that really synthetic one. Just a lot of swirling madness. What a creative break. Voice gets me every time. Again, more of that insistence. That's just that hammering home of that point, right? I'm getting some more of this wild, industrial-style aggression here. We'll have to snipe this climbing here. Slow climb, and then... Super massive alien voices here, really, this is... when you're in that party space, this this is just voices everywhere. Get in that loop. And then... And then, fascinating conclusion.

I mean, really, that is one where you just need to light one up afterwards. It's kind of like you're gonna have the smoking barrel of the gun, and you're gonna end up smoking one also. I mean, holy, what was that? Honestly, Emric and I just looked at each other and we're absolutely silent. We could not say anything. Which, between me and you know him as a French DAT mafia collector, pretty rare occasion. So completely blasted.

So this was I probably got this you know in April or may. I think it came out in May June. And there was a time around then that Simon Posford was going to be playing In Birmingham, and he had to play a DJ set as well as a live set. And he's like, "Haven't got any music." I was like, "He's asking me, I don't have anything." You know, I just like this new Matsuri thing. He came over and heard this, and he's like, "What the hell is this?" It's like, "This is, this is different." You know, it's not extreme. It's not, you know, Infinity Project. Not what we're used to. So he took it, and he did play it. You know, it was. I need to play something. Need to play something different. Let's try this out.

So, so this got played by Simon Posford in Birmingham for a gig that I drove up for with some friends. Nick Doof played as well. Didn't play this. So yeah, very very different kind of track and of course, right? You know, I was very much still in my. I want the spacey stuff. I want, you know, like I'm missing a lot of the bleeps and so on. I've talked about that, but you know, I'm also a pretty full spectrum kind of guy, and I'm into this, you know, what I've termed the sort of the cyber rock thing, you know, when it's if it's well blended.

And you know, you listen to this and you think, you know, Fatima Mansions again by Juno Reactor. As a child, I could walk on the ceiling, right, which came out just a couple of months before this. Which, as I stated, and I didn't like initially, and then I really got behind it. And you know, this is part of that whole, you know, super dramatic operatic nighttime, you know, space opera, cyber rock situation. And God, I love this track. Again, completely unique, whole other story. There's nothing like it, and really, really happy to have it in this series.

And thank you so much to Laurent Deflo for sharing incredible details about this masterpiece. So I am going to sign off here and leave you with the entire track without my commentary.
