Artist: Oforia
Song: Maximiser
Year: 1998

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 86 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are still in that 80s. I'm going even far too retro here, and in the '96 to '97 season, I do remember the '80s as well, before some of you were born. So that '96 to '97 season, I mean, we're spending a lot of time on this particular season because there's just so much music coming out and being developed.

And this track that I'm featuring today comes from an album which I was really surprised to just find out was only released in early '98. I'm I'm assuming early discogs only said 1998, and that really surprised me because I absolutely know that I heard it and got my hands on this particular track from the album well before that, and I remember hearing it at a summer solstice party in 1997 was a little bit of a snafu situation. There was a group of us who were going to play, just a gathering of friends, and play in the forest. And then somebody found out about it and took over, and got Joti Sidhu and Dino and all of these, you know, great folks to play. And I remember Raja Ram was there, and we're dancing in the forest and talking about our DNA being readjusted and all of that, and but I was supposed to play and I didn't, and this great friend over there, a great Greek DJ Harry, he was supposed to play, didn't. Only Richard Purple, who had been booked, he got a whole hour squeezed in between, but basically somebody just hijacked our party and got all these people on, so that was kind of interesting.

But I remember Dino playing a whole lot of this sound and this track, which you know the opening track on this album became really like the the clarion call of a whole other kind of sound. And so this is Oforia. I I was really shocked to learn this was released in '98 because I remember this hitting and I remember being like just wow because this is a whole other style. So Dino Psaras had worked with Ofer Dikovski, who's the musician behind Oforia, on "Phreaky," and so not sure if that's how you know the introduction to Dragonfly came out because you know they'd released a "Freaky" single and you know one of the tracks was on the second Order Odonata. Yeah, it was the second. Maybe there was one on the third as well, but in any case, so I just remember this sound.

And what I do remember as well, I'm just gonna, you know, lots of caveats because I absolutely love this, but remember Dino played a lot of it, and with any sound, I think there's certain elements that communicate in a certain way in certain harmonic pieces, and too much of a good thing could be too much of a good thing. And I think, in particular, I'll be highlighting when we listen to the opening track "Maximizer," really well named. I'll point out some of the harmonic things that are happening, and I've heard this happen before with some other artists. Certain styles and sort of sounds from Etnica/Pleiadians and others, like you have to manage the harmonic packaging and flow really well, because I think too much of a certain key in certain intervals, I think can push you a little too far. I mean, there is definitely it's part of the goal of this music, I think, and these events to take your consciousness where it hasn't been. I also think that there's a, I consider a bit of a responsibility to manage the flow of some of these intervals well. So I will usually, just personally, based on my experience and how I encountered some of these sounds, really work with you know. There's only going to be so much of this kind of interval because it really is powerful, incredibly powerful.

I absolutely love this track. It was really interesting coming back to it after after quite a while and sort of just remembering the incredible sound and the incredible impact that it had. There is something absolutely unique in terms of the synth sounds. The harmonic language, and so on. And you know, Ofer plays a range of styles, absolutely. So you know, he's not like locked into this just this one particular sound. That's one of the things I really appreciate about him as an artist. But this track, when it hit, I remember it hit. So, so why don't we get started with the first track from the Oforia’s Delirious album on Dragonfly? Delirious, what a great name. Maximiser. Here we go.

So, this aerated pitch melting is already going to have quite an effect if you play. Pitch melting—it's already gonna have quite an effect if you play the full introduction. Really cool, bit of a psychedelic, you know, aerated melt. So that rhythm, really powerful. And just you know, like I've named before, this kind of Morse code. It just goes up there and then fades, and it comes back down. Very clear message with the bassline. Love that pew, and then that an octave leap, which would go back to The Infinity Project Stimuli. That was kind of one of the really key elements they introduced there. Super uplifting so far, right? Right. So it's got a very triumphant nature. This is where we're gonna hear, you know, where the great musicians back then were creating lots of different simultaneous moods and emotions.

Now there's this kind of sense of something, some foreboding, something is coming. That climbing voice again. So like, what is going on here harmonically? There's a devil's tritone. Right, so you have a minor second, but it goes up to a augmented fourth or diminished fifth, which is this is the interval that the church banned. So there's this real tension, right? It's a very unusual interval, and this is the key signature of this track. Now it gets doubled up. Right, so it's fascinating because it's exploring, you know, a musical interval that religious leaders actually banned, and it's celebratory, but also introspective, right? So the rhythm adds to the celebration, but then there's that darker element to this. These are these notes. It's just nothing like it at the time, and incredibly impactful on the dance floor and with headphones.

The way that kick comes in the stories nobody's making stories like this right now wow, how do you blend it and have this uplifting energy with this really unusual harmonic language? It's quite a feat. Parallel shift down a note or two, and we're back in the major dominant key. So some parallel shifts there, not quite sort of classical level modulation, but just a side shift and a mid shift, and then again a creative break, right? Brings back that baseline element, that noodling up there, circular pattern, just. This circular pattern just... ...bores a hole in your brain. You have to climb, and then it breaks at the top. There's that one that's climbing up, and another one coming down.

Now it actually goes up to the perfect fifth, so that diminished fourth goes up that one note to the more acceptable perfect fifth. That's really key because all of a sudden it's breaking through from that tension into the more uplifting, perfect interval. Interestingly, into the modulation. Let me take that up again. With that uplifting change that took place. And then the outro begins, incredible chimes with that descent. And then it ends as it began, except for one little shift that comes after the last bass baseline thing here. Holy! Holy!

So you can imagine, I mean, really, when this hit, you know, on the dance floors in '97, it was just—it was not. There was nothing like it. It was a completely unique sound, and that harmonic framework, right, of that diminished fourth. It's in a really unusual key. It seems to be in A flat, which is an awkward one. Lots of black notes in there, and so it's that A flat that then goes up to the D natural instead of to the E flat. So, I mean, technically, if you're writing it, it's going to be an E double flat. So, to be diminished a bit. Anyway, very unusual, right? Minor second and diminished fourth.

So, really, like you know these combinations of notes that unlock certain emotions and patterns, right? And when they're arranged in a story, you know, in each track, and this is the rich thing about our scene, right? Each track is already complete. You don't need to be doing effects or mixing in other things or whatever. It's already a story, and then you make a larger story . And it's just, you know, I'm editorializing here. It's just my personal thought that if you're playing a lot of Devil's Tritone and some other, you know, certain intensity with music that includes the level of darkness, the level of uplifting, and so on, I just I don't want too much of the same thing of any kind, because there's that whole flow that takes you on that journey instead of like you're feeling the same mood all the time. It's not what life is like . So you know, having you know, again, what I've named before, this blend of seemingly contradictory emotions, right, simultaneously uplifting and introspective, and a little bit dark and kind of broody, it's definitely a broodiness to that diminished fourth. Just all of these simultaneously, and then the way it breaks up just in that section where it sort of finally triumphantly breaks through to that perfect fifth interval, absolute magic.

So hats off, Ofer, for a masterpiece that was very distinctive for me. This really captures is the sound of part of what I was going through in the summer of of ninety seven, you know? And initially, a really mixed reaction because it was like, "What is this? This is completely different." And then when I heard this by itself, not in that set that I thought was just like, "Oh, it's getting a little bit intense," I was like, "Okay, this is this is quite a gem. So I definitely played it out at some point back then. Probably when I played my only London party, like official party, was December '97 with Laughing Buddha and I forget who else, some other local fellows, and probably played it out then. And I would have played it in Japan a bit the following year. Haven't played it in a while, and it was actually my shortlist for when I was in Goa, but didn't make it into the final set, and it's going to have to soon.

So I will sign off here from episode 86 of Retro Goa Explorations, and then leave you with the complete track.
