Artist: Space Tribe
Song: In the Hands of the Shaman
Year: 1994

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 90 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. Well, we're approaching the end of this calendar year of what year is it? 2024. Episode ninety. I'm looking at about half of what's been done so far, being in the '96 to '97 season. So tracks that I first encountered, or that were produced in from the autumn of '96 through to the end of the summer of '97.

Now a lot of these tracks were produced before, and I know that's the case with this one. It is kind of surprising sometimes how long it takes for some of these tracks to to get released. So you know, the new music that we're hearing isn't always necessarily new; it's often just newly available. And this one's interesting because, in a sense, it was released quite out of sequence for the other music being made in this project. And so, I mean, I've really been debating. It's very hard. I'm needing to sort of wrap up this season before we move on to the next. And it's, you know, there's so many, so many great tracks I want to feature. And I was just thinking today about what should be next. There's a few tracks where I'm waiting to hear from the artists, and so I've put those on hold a little bit.

And then I realized I haven't featured Space Tribe in this season. Now the Space Tribe tracks that I featured before were two that Oli Wisdom did with Simon Posford, and those were the first Space Tribe tracks that were released, to my knowledge. He did produce music before those tracks were done. Now, in the official Space Tribe bio, it says that those were done in 1995. Not possible, because at least Machine Elf was released in '94, so my sense is really they were all done in '94, possibly one in '95. But looking at the sound signatures and all of that, and the reality of where Ali was and moving around, I'm pretty sure they were done in '94.

Now We've done Machine Elf. We've done Geo-Matrix or however you want to pronounce it. Brilliant title. Two of those with Simon Posford. The other ones that were issued with Simon were Flipout the Dolphin, which came out on this this retro this compilation wasn't wasn't retro back then. It was brand new. It was the second Volume of Concept in Dance on CD Tribal Science. So there's Flip Out the Dolphin, and it's an edit, so it's about seven and a half minutes long or something. There's a longer version out there of ten and a half minutes or so, and I've got more to say about this track in a second. But the other one with Posford came out only in, I believe it was early '97. I think January '97, and it was on Oli's first CD as Space Drive, Sonic Mandela, which came out on Spirit Zone, the first of many CDs that he put out on that label. And it includes a desk mix of The Great Spirit, and also includes In the Hands of the Shaman, which was done with Simon Posford.

And I was a little surprised, and it should have been obvious though, when Olli Wisdom told me that "Flipout the Dolphin" is cut from a longer desk mix or a live mix that was done in the studio with based on "In the Hands of the Shaman." So basically, it was a live mix of "In the Hands of the Shaman." I have heard that it's about 20 minutes long, and you know, as a 20-minute track, it doesn't quite have the cohesiveness of, say, the Slinky Wizard, you know, Wizard track, desk mix of you know, 20 plus minutes. But a chunk of that came out, so that was In the Hands of the Shaman. But that came out before. Look how the dolphin came out before the actual track fully Itself came out. So in a sense, we've been saying that you know there's four tracks that Simon Posford wrote with Ali Wisdom. In a sense, it's actually only three, if you consider that there's that you know that this is an alternate mix, or it's actually taken they're really taken from the same session.

So we are going to do In the Hands of the Shaman Today, so even though this was likely produced in '94, maybe '95, it's really in the '96-'97 season that it was published. That's when I first knowingly heard it. I absolutely might have heard that before, either when I heard Ollie play and I couldn't recognize it, or somebody else might have been playing it who had it on DAT.

But this is a great track. Has all the hallmarks of early Hallucinogen and early Space Tribe. Evocative, great spoken samples. We can definitely recognize the Hallucinogen signature with the kick. That sounds like the second track in his Twisted album, Orphic Trench, also Orphic Resonance, which is coming out on the seat on the LP edition of the singles remastered, and a very overlooked track. It came out in, I believe, the autumn of '96 on a charity compilation. So very similar, big boomy, bassy kick, and very dark atmosphere. Same with the whole bass. Really wonderful track that's melodic, and in a sense we could say uplifting, but it's not the kind of uplifting, right? Because it's still got that combination of moods that I've been speaking about in several of these episodes, where we we have something uplifting, but a little bit anguished, or you know, a little tormented, or a little in, you know, introspective, while it's still upward in a sense. So, really, really interesting track. One I've played many times. Really love it. And so it's time to feature it in this episode. So here we go. In the Hands of the Shaman by Space Tribe.

Of course, very psychedelic oriented theme. These beautiful voices and effects here , note changes, and you can really hear a lot of the 94, 95 TIP sound in this. And then the sample from the title. Notice the the pulsing of that beat, of that bassline, the way it goes down and then keeps going, and those real tribal voices, great percussion, wonderful effect leading into the entry of the kick. The way that's being goes through effects, but it never sounds like you know when they put clubby music through a flanger or something like that. It's just not the same thing. What a booming kick! Then kick drops out while this comes in. Then it comes back. Again, just those simple up and down figurations, which really started to people started moving away from that. And this, and then, then you get that same beautiful melody up. Sounds like an octave higher. And it's really just, it feels like it's part of a melody, but it's just, it really has a hook and a catch on its own.

And the interplay between this, this is where it has that sort of gnarlier, darker kind of sound, right? Like in the Great Spirit as well. Right, this is not a sunrise track obviously right. We're talking like a really good nighttime stormer, and this whoosh. Those beautiful intervals and note combinations that are so characteristic of Posford’s work at this time. And it's you know it's got this dramatic Orchestral, you know, again that kind of space opera sound, really on a very big canvas. Lots of sort of anguished cries into the heavens. Here it seems. Again, I just love the way things pull back so organically in the storytelling. Beautiful sample for this, leading into this transition. Little pitch bend there, and the gating. You know. You know, there's no cheesy key changes here. Everything is just naturally within the, you know, the sort of logical chord progressions that you would have in a given key.

And this uplifting riff. And this is what I mean, you know, like this is a darker track, but then we get this sort of uplifting build, you know the the melody itself, but also the notes upward movement really brings that on. That kind of falling a little classic Hallucinogen sound there. And again, that growling sound again that we know from Hallucinogen and TIP as well. That real tribal influence that Olly would bring. And this mantra-like effect of having this repeated over and over again really puts you in that trance state. Love the percussion there, and just that going down and up very simply, so you're just kind of riding the wave as things go up and down. I love the there's the that rhythmic sort of there's a little grace note that happens in that main riff sort of just adds a little propulsion to it.

Then a little bit more distorted, so it has pitch, but not the note tones. When it gets tweaked like that, it just really pushes your limits as well. It's great. Okay. Again love that chorus and those gated voices we're gonna start wrapping up shortly those dark voices. Okay, so we're just heading into the conclusion here, the final burst. Again, that uplifting melody from before, sort of carrying you through. So things get darker, and then you have that reminder of celebration and uplifting aliveness. A little change in articulation there where the those bits get shorter in value then we get that descending figuration along with those voices Son of everything's going off at once. And that beautiful smooth legato as it draws to a close, and then that beautiful baseline with that just that one note deviation, that one upper voice, and just kind of one of those long fade out.

It's kind of like a lot of pop music, right, where there wouldn't be a clear ending to it, and it would just be like, you know, something's going on, and they just fade out of it. And with, you know, this kind of music, of course, that's where you mix out. But, whoo, quite a track. How long is that? Eight minutes fifty-nine seconds.

So, Um, you know, pretty big scale, great storytelling, some wonderful pauses. The way you then, you know, you don't hear a riff for a little bit and then it comes back. Um, so really grand storyline, and you know the riffs, the depth of the texture, the higher frequencies, the combination of really you know synthesized sounds with, you know, that Organic human element and the spoken samples as well. I mean, really well rounded in terms of the the kinds of content that's there.

And of course, it's got you know, I mean, brilliant collaborative work, of course. And there's no doubt that there's the Posford signature with some of those harmonic elements, some of those sounds that we can also hear. You know, if this was likely done at Butterfly Studios, I'm gonna guess, you know, which is the Dragonfly Studios, which is where a lot of the TIP stuff was done, and so you know they had that kind of equipment. So there's a kind of a sonic framework that's got some shared elements, and of course there's still the individuality and what stands apart from the, you know, solo Hallucinogen tracks and Infinity Project tracks, and so on, but definitely part of that shared language.

So again, you know, this might really be from '94, and only released in, I believe, early '97. So I first heard about this album when I was visiting Mark Neal, whom I'd met before, but then went to his house in January '97, and he had come back from Australia, had stayed with Ollie, spent time with. Seven, and he had come back from Australia, had stayed with Ollie, spent time with him, and we were talking about, you know, how he, you know, how Ollie characterized and spoke about different tracks and the different flavors and so on. And he had a promo cassette of this album, so didn't have this physically yet. So I copied the cassette and got it. And then, of course, as soon as this was out in the shops, I got that. So, um, so when that actually was, I don't know, but I remember very clearly. You know, that was the first occasion when I knew, yay, Space Tribe album.

And also noticed that you know a lot of the tracks didn't have this particular flavor because they weren't made at Butterfly Studios and they weren't made with Postford. And Ollie was developing his distinctive sound of you know, so there's some Lighter textures and quirkier kind of stuff, and much more high-paced, but also some slower stuff, right? Flower of Life on here, one twenty-five, Atomic Pow Wow, one thirty-two. So you know, there was always that range—the range of flavors, range of styles, and also the storyline on an album. So I'll probably feature another one from here, there are too many things. Again, you know, I can I can do two years of programs just on just on one season, but we'll figure it out.

I'm Mark DJ Solitaire, going to wrap up episode ninety here of Retro Goa Explorations with that classic from Space Tribe In the Hands of the Shaman. Through fallen hell or You're so angelic, you need a pinch of psychedelic. In the Hands of the Shaman. Thanks for watching!
