Artist: The Infinity Project
Song: Overwind
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 94 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. This is the first episode of 2025. I am really unable to stop sharing tracks right now from the '96 to '97 season, so from the autumn of '96 through the end of the summer '97, simply because there's just so many unbelievable, truly pivotal tracks and ones that, for me, you know personally, my experience and my trance journey that really had a huge impact on me. So I was just going through, and it might be around episode 100 that I start maybe being able to shift into the 97, 98 season, but quite a journey over here. Some absolutely incredible tracks from this period, and this is one that I wasn't quite sure when it came out, so I had to do a little research, and it's one that I remember first hearing about.

I must have gotten a copy of the vinyl, or rather, transferred the vinyl to DAT from Mark Neal, because I didn't have any personal connections to the TIP label crew at the time. And I remember getting this incredible single that was released on that label, and I remember I had visited Mark in January '97 when I copied a bunch of great stuff onto vinyl, and then I was in the DJ booth at Return to the Source, which I started being able to do from around January or so. Tsuyoshi Suzuki would invite me in, and I remember him and Mark Allen saying, "Oh, did you hear the latest TIP single?" And Tsuyoshi was like, "Yeah, Overwind." I was like, "Which, you know, If you look at the spelling of overwind, it looks like over wind, right?" So, you know, as a former English teacher, I understand that really well.

So yeah, Overwind, an absolutely incredible track from The Infinity Project that was put together at one of Graham's friends' studios. So he gave me the lowdown, which I'll share with you here. Was recorded at my mate Brendan’s in Forest Gate, a room in his house. Many complaints from the neighbors. Got lots of new kit at the time, plus a new desk, so was going crazy at all hours of the day and night. Just wanted to use all the equipment that we had. In speaking about the track, Graham says it's like a coiled spring let loose and just effing having it. You can tell we was having a great laugh making this track.

It is really a fun one, and this is again something you know as the music started expanding and going into a lot of deep territory, right? Was talking about a lot of you know the anguish and the angst and that full you know the contradictory human emotions that are happening at the same time. This is a real upper, and yet as always with TIP stuff, and when I say TIP now, I mean The Infinity Project. As always in Infinity Project tracks, there's always this kind of darker, growling kind of sound. So we have both that growling, that growling stuff that's going on, which is a real Graham Wood kind of, you know, he really did that sound, still does, incredibly well, and so we get that with a whole lot of fun. It is a really fun track, and it's kind of crazy in the tempo, and you know it is just really, really wild. It's incredibly fast, but it's almost a kind of tongue-in-cheek kind of atmosphere in this track. It's really pretty incredible.

So it's also notably, I think, with the release just before on Phosphorescent of the track “Phosphoressence” by The Infinity Project. You know, I keep I I will say TIP just because it's shorter. But you know, I realize of course there's TIP Records, the label. I think these are the first tracks that were coming out that where Simon Posford hadn't worked on them, right? So a lot of the ones that were done in '93, late '93, but issued in '94 and '94-'95 releases, he was working at Butterfly Studios, and then you know The Infinity Project started working. I guess you know at Brendan’s place and perhaps elsewhere, but without Simon. And so you know we get more of Graham's interaction with Raja Ram here, and Raj serving as you know atmospheric coordinator and really bringing out the best of whoever he works with. And here we get you know that sort of gnarly Graham Wood groove. It's a really magical track.

So I'm going to put it on. We're going to give it a listen. Then I've got something to point out about a difference between the vinyl edit and the CD edit, which I think will be interesting if you never noted that before. So let's get started. Here we are with The Infinity Project Overwind.

Right. So you hear this gnarly sort of slide. Love that bounce back. Then that sound repeats. We're going to get the kick coming in. There we go. Really keeps you waiting. So lots. So lots of cool spacey sounds, and then those fun upper sounds that are now a little bit lower with the bassline. This oscillating, which we're going to be hearing about, real momentum. So again, you know it's upbeat, but there's that dark undertone. But overall, it's a really you know up and groovy track. Just listen to the interplay between those long notes and those other sounds. No real melody per se, right? So we're just getting all these great sounds and this upper stuff coming to munch away at those upper frequencies. And then, while that bassline comes in, that beautiful riff. Very bassline-like, but a bit higher, right? So, wonderful, wonderful riff. You get again, that sort of munching kind of sound. Pac-Man on speed. Just that repetition again. That's sort of, again, that munching sound getting a little bit louder. Those creative breaks where they would just drop the kick for a beat or two, right? That bounce back, that's the key sound. Listen to how the different voices blend in and then come out of one another, really masterfully balanced. And that repetition. Oscillating at ten times a second. I mean, what can you say? It's just insane. This just rips up the dance floor.

So again, notice how, I mean, lots of notes going on here. Notice how everything plays well. All the different voices play well, beautifully together. And really, just you know, this repetition just zoning you out. It's Like how many times has this been going on, right? At this point, you're just completely disoriented and overwinding yourself. Chord change, brilliant, because the chord change really fits within the relative keys of the of the original key. And wonderful evolution of the sounds that we've heard so far. Then. And then this unbelievable bit here. Beautiful relationship with these notes and infectious riff. Then. Again, my backdrop just can't handle it. Notice that other little voice coming in there, and then the munchies, and then that slide, all happening at once. Like, how many times has this gone on, right? Just completely hypnotic. And back to that dark, gnarly note. And it's like what's next again you just never know when it's going to shift that drive keeps it going another unleashed mayhem. Let's see how that gets tweaked to the max over there. Man. I mean, wow! Isn't that beautiful?

So, I mean, so much that's going on, right? All these incredible riffs. This storyline structure, where you know, again, there's that repetition of these, you know, the cycle of eight bars will get repeated and then gets repeated and gets repeated. And you're, you know, with all of that, you know, the the circular quality of the riffs and that forward momentum, it just keeps you going and tripping out because you never know when the cycle is going to break, right? And then something else gets introduced. A brilliant chord change for that middle section, and then you know all kinds of extra riffs. I mean, amazing storytelling. And this is just what's something that's missing now. You know, the way bits are introduced and then they're evolved, and the whole thing is layered. All the voices are playing together beautifully. The progression is logical and is a story. It never feels boring or repetitious, even as things are being repeated, because there's a story that's playing out.

Now, something that struck me when I copied the vinyl and then got this on CD, and I think it was TIP Singles 3, but it might have been two, might have been one. I'm really not sure. I know it was also on this rare Japanese edition, the Japanese Mu (Clear) compilation. You know they were always done by colors, right? There was yellow and this and that, yellow, blue, etc. This one, even though it's green, the character is clear, so it's called the Mu compilation. I had a lot of stuff that was on vinyl only, and it's Laughing Buddha Karma, and there's the Paul Jackson remix of “Uforica”, I think, and it's hard to read because the writing is so clear that you know the case kind of erases it. But this had Overwind on it also.

But there's about a minute length difference between the vinyl edit and the version that was on CD. And I'm going to play you just a little bit of the end. Let's listen to the. You're going to hear there's a bit of a cut that takes place at the very end section of the vinyl edit. Just give this a listen. Oscillating at 10 times a second. So you get that sample and then, then it starts leading into the outro. That's leading into the outro.

Now listen to the same section of what's going on on the CD version. Oscillating at ten times a second. And you get another round, right? So there's this whole extra minute, which is great, I think. You know, you just you think it's maybe going to end with that vocal sample, and then whoosh, it just launches in, you know, blasts off again. It's like this is never going to end. This is amazing.

So not sure why that happened. I asked Graham Wood. I mean, he's like, I don't know. We probably just played around with it, and you know, we're in that atmospheric state and kind of liked it. So whatever the case may be, it seems like the vinyl version is shorter, which is interesting because quite often vinyl versions were longer, and were shortened so they could fit on a CD compilation, right? With a time limit of about 80 minutes. Sometimes CDs were sort of set at 74, and then they were able to go up to 80. So there are some tracks that were actually you know, shortened edits, or they sort of shortened, just shortened the intro or the outro to be able to fit it on the CD. In this case, the CD version was longer. Not sure why, but there we go.

So I think that's about it for this episode. I'm going to sign off here, and then leave you with the complete track without my commentary.
