Artist: Laughing Buddha
Song: Karma
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 96 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So, as I've stated several times, as we're here in the 96 to 97 season, there is no way I'm going to be able to feature every amazing track that I loved back then and that I've learned to love ever since from that incredibly pivotal season where we saw lots of new artists coming out and new, you know, incredible releases by established projects as well, and a lot of innovation in terms of the musical production and musical styles, but I would definitely be remiss if I didn't feature this group, and I can't believe it's again waited until it's been until episode 96 until I have featured this dynamic duo, who went under two different names as several projects have done when they released on different labels. They sometimes use different names because they had an exclusive contract. So we saw that before with Total Eclipse. Once they were signed to Blue Room, they released on other labels as The Antidote, and then also same thing for The Pleiadians moniker when Etnica was signed to Blue Room. Also, in this case, Cosmosis was signed to Transient, and they released on the TIP label as Laughing Buddha, and then once these two amazing musicians, Bill and Jez, once they went their separate ways to continue their projects individually, Bill took the Cosmosus name, and Jez stuck with Laughing Buddha.

But while they were together, they, you know, the tracks were written together, and even if there were occasions when you know they largely did a track on their own, they kept both their names on, and that's the case in this particular case because they did still do work together. So in this case, Jez wrote this amazing track, which was part of the second single that they released on TIP, which came out early in '97. This track Karma was written when Billy was touring as a guitarist with a band, and Jez got really inspired by a sample that he came across on a CD that just had a voice going Karma like that, and almost singing it. And so he just got inspired by that, and he got focused, and he wrote this track. Basically, got all of the foundation of it set in like either one night or one day. It was super duper fast. And something he told me was like, you know, sometimes it's way better if you just stick with that creative flow and you just do it and you don't question and you just go go with it. And rather than the tracks that you keep going back to and so on. And of course, that's not exclusively the case. There's you know those amazing tracks where people really worked and really polished and spent a lot of time. But when there's that creative flow, so that was the case in this case.

And then when Billy came back from his tour, you know, they worked you know tweaking the arrangement, the engineering, and then it came out on this amazing TIP single, and it's really a phenomenal, phenomenal track. Now I've known Jez since that period, a little bit afterwards, probably when we met, and we've been friends ever since. And we had a call this week in which he shared some amazing details, including some of what I've just told you. But there's more. So on go the glasses for what it is that I was unable to remember. And so yeah, so this was done in his studio in Crouch End in London, where it was converted offices that used to be a warehouse. And as I stated, you know, he wrote the track basically, the bulk of it in a day while Billy was on tour, and then they worked on the arrangement together. And then he said he just said also that the track wrote itself, which is again, you know, kind of a cool thing when you're in that creative flow, and it's like the music just the music wants to be heard, wants to be voiced, and so you know you're just there, twiddling the knobs and doing the bidding of the creative process.

Um, so as I named, uh, you know, Laughing Buddha was originally for when they released with other labels. Then they kept the names differently as they split. Cosmosis is actually a name that Jez came up with, even though, you know, Billy ended up sticking with that name, and he said it had to do with the osmosis of the cosmos. So you're kind of absorbing the cosmos by osmosis. The sample CD was called Heart of Asia, and so it just had that voice saying karma kind of sung, and then he also broke up just the first syllable of ka ka ka. So you have that kind of echoing effect. Was released in February '97, and in terms of the tempo, you know, there were no real rules back then. It's a really fast track. It's about 150 BPM, and there's incredible clarity with it. And so you don't feel that it's rushed or it's you know it doesn't feel too much. Um, and I think it's partly you know again the word the you know the way it fits in that might have been part of why the tempo, uh you know, sort of fit with how the word was being intoned, but but just said, you know, there were no rules. It wasn't like we have to do something at this BPM or that BPM. You just kind of did what you wanted, which is great.

And then for equipment, there's a 303-type line. That's a distorted Novation Bass Station. That was a really popular synth at the time. I remember. There's a Roland JD-990. That was a really popular synth at the time. I remember. There's a JD-990 multi-timbral rack mount Roland synth, Akai S3200 sampler, which everybody seems to have had, Roland Juno-106 as well, and a Korg Mono/Poly.

There's something that I noted with the harmonies, is that there's a perfect fifth. So, so and when you get the main riff, there's a perfect fifth, and then it goes down to a diminished, right? And that's that devil's tritone that we've come across in several tracks, right? Which the church was not really big on. And there's also a diminished seventh, so it goes up to a diminished seventh, minor third, then a major second. So you know, quite often we had those minor seconds, minor thirds, as a major second, but a minor third, perfect fifth, which is a normal fifth. If it's not major or minor, just perfect, and then goes down one semitone. So it's a really evocative, moving harmony that I find, you know, really it really hits some cool points, and it's really fast, but it just works beautifully.

And the other geeky bit, uh, there's a distorted lead. There's a bit where it goes backwards, and so what Jez did was he put the lead into the sampler and reversed it, so it starts going backwards. So see if you can spot where that is. I actually haven't noticed it yet. So pretty cool stuff.

So thank you, Jez. Really wonderful to get all of these details. And this really is a real favorite track. I remember it making a big impression then, and it has every time I played it. This is the track where my set at ZNA in 2022, when I dropped this one, I think four or five tracks into my set, that's when everything just completely exploded. So, so let's give this a listen, shall we? Laughing Buddha's wonderful masterpiece, Karma.

Beautiful bouncing bass with that rhythm. There's that voice and that and that echo, just that simple mantra-like thing, and then the kick comes in. Cool little upper percussive element, just opening up, sort of raising the ceiling. I love those sweeps. And really, it just does become a mantra, doesn't it? Now we get these, like, you know, wonderful figurations going up and down. Again, something that's just not nearly done enough these days with those harmonies. And listen how beautifully layered it is. I mean that karma voice just continues while all this stuff is going on. Now that's that cool set of harmonies I was talking about. They all fit together perfectly. Again, just like all the people at the party started getting along and fitting together, singing their own tune and dancing to their own tune. Own tune beautifully evocative right and then we start getting that good old gnarly growly sound and there's the rhythm with it and it just adds that there's that crunchy element to it and then we get those butterflies again while we've got that grime happening. Then that's going to do something very cool at the top. Again, the rhythm and the pitch are really effective.

Now we get a variation on those notes. Who's next? That karma repetition is just wild how that just continues. I love that whoosh. Lovely mystical harmony there. Love those real cyber whooshes. And it's building to something else as well. Just like you think, there's like how much is going on? There's so much, so much frenetic energy, and then there's actually going to be more. It's almost a little bit calmer now for what's for what's about to come in. Wow! This laser beam message being, you know, transmitted through the cosmos, those descending diminished minor harmonies.

Now we're back to that beautiful initial harmony that goes up to that, you know, minor seven, maybe diminished seven, and this beautiful riff comes back again. This glorious, expansive, ecstatic energy. Just notice how many things like what's going down, what's going up, and then all the different harmonic and melodic interplay. We get to hear more of that, less going on. Notice how the Karma voice is dropped out. A little bit more choppy here, right? The articulation is more detached, more staccato. And there too, that's the way it's pronounced and cut up a little bit more. Damn, there's beautiful waves of evocative harmonies. I love the way the kick will often just pull out and come back in. That rising sound that I just love. And that.

Now things start winding down, notice the rhythm of that bass again with all of this. Holy moly! What a trip! I mean, it's amazing, isn't it? It is so fast, but with everything that's going on, it doesn't feel overwhelming. It's just got this rhythmic drive. There's that right, the rhythm of that karmic voice, and then the rhythm of the bass line, and then the you know the wonderful varied harmonic patternings. With you know, there's at least three different kind of riffs going on there with different you know chord relate like note relationships, and boy they all fit together so well. And again, that is the magic where you know if they just put every single riff together all at once, like you know they would fit.

And so then there's this incredible story that happens where things you know pull out and come back in, and then different ones are playing together. And it really is as I've named in at least a couple of previous episodes, that this is like the experience on the dance floor where you're dancing with someone, and then you move and you dance with someone else, and then hey, maybe the three of you get together and you're dancing, and you know there's this whole level of relationship, and and then you know how the story evolves, and it just sounds so natural. So it's not a boxy structure whatsoever. It's logical, but again, it was not externally imposed. Of like, oh, we should have 32 bars of something like this, and then we'll do a little break. There was no structure like that. The structure evolved from the story and from the innate connectivity of all of the different lines that, as Jez said, wrote itself, he just happened to be there to capture it so beautifully.

So absolute masterpiece of a track. Absolutely love it. Glad I finally got to feature, you know, Jez and Billy, who really so many amazing tracks as Cosmos and Laughing Buddha. The reason I haven't featured them before is I actually never got a copy of the Cosmosis album at the time, and so I'm sure I heard some of those tracks, but they didn't quite connect. Of like, oh yeah, this one is by whom? And so the previous TIP single I did have from the previous season, I did get that, but this is the one that really, you know, hit, and it still does.

So time to listen to the whole track on its own. So I'll sign off here and leave it for you without commentary. I'm Mark DJ Solitare, leaving you now with the wonderful creation by Laughing Buddha Karma.
