Artist: Slinky Wizard
Song: Licenced To Slink
Year: 1997

Hey, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 98 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are still, but not for much longer, in the '96-'97 season, so from the autumn of '96 through to the end of the summer '97, tracks that I first encountered or that were first released in that period when I'd moved to London, and wow, so much great stuff. As I've said countless times, and especially recently, it's going to be hard to wrap up this period, but we need to get on because there's so much more as well coming in the following season. There's a few that have been waiting to feature for quite a while, so I might come back and revisit some of the other treasures from this period. Because you know, on a single compilation CD, there can be you know almost everything that I could feature, and you know, one episode a week, hard to do them all.

So, this one's really important to do as it's a track. Not too many coming out at this period still from one of the original track projects, rather, that I remember from the first compilation that I got, and this one I remember the impression that it made, and we were all, you know, I heard murmurs about it before, before it was released, and then of course when it was released, indeed, it did make an impression. So this is Slinky Wizard with Licenced To Slink, which is based on the James Bond theme.

So at this point, Slinky Wizard, which went through a few incarnations, because we know that you know, very first track also featured Adam Boyd, who passed away in an accident in '93 or '94, Simon Posford was working on a couple of the original tracks, right, which we've featured Wizard as well as Lunar Juice. But at this point, he was not working with them. And Gus Till was indeed now part of Slinky Wizard, and he's kind of the last man standing. So we had Gus Till, then also George Barker , Ronnie Biggs, and Dominic Lamb. Dominic was one who I heard as a DJ several times, so he was often performing in that in that capacity. As was George. Now Gus was the only member of the project who I knew at the time. I had met him at a dinner with Tsuyoshi Suzuki, when his brother Andrew Till, the legendary founder of the equally legendary Sy Harmonics label, was passing through town with Nick Taylor, so it was a real Australian contingent. And Gus comes from—I mean—he has a huge, rich musical background, and is very knowledgeable about every musical scene. I mean, you know, I'm a classical guy. Gus knows his stuff, really, really, really informed and educated, and creative and inspired.

And so, this was his idea. He's a huge James Bond fan, and so he said, you know, he wanted to use this incredible theme, and it works brilliantly. There is so much going on in this track, and it's just kind of like variations and meanderings on a theme, and it's just this long, expansive storyline. So long, in fact, that a shorter edit had to go onto the CD because, you know, on a compilation CD. And back in the day, 80 minutes maximum. Sometimes it was 74. I remember at a period. So, not sure what it was here because I can't locate my Air Born compilation CD that this came on. But the CD version is just under 10 minutes. The vinyl version is 12. We're doing the CD version today, but it's just one of those long, meandering, gorgeous storylines where everything just flows with this incredible sense of narrative, as I've been talking about a lot. How you know there was just a natural exploration and a natural story, as opposed to a sense of a boxy structure where it's really predictable, and you know, there's a break coming up. None of that here.

So, so again, so this was Gus's idea. He said George was fully on board. He wasn't sure if Dominic or Ronnie were quite as inspired as he was for this particular theme, but this definitely got a huge reaction when played out initially, and since Gus said he remembers it being really quite quite trippy, sort of seeing all these all these psychedelic dancers doing James Bond moves on the dance floor. So it's really quite fun.

Now, what's interesting for me with this is, you know, I am more into the otherworldly kind of less earthy elements a lot of the time, and especially less tied into specific cultural references. I'm sort of more into the, you know, yes, some of that, but certainly not like a like, you know, stuff from how to put it, you know, different ancient cultures, you know, tribal stuff. That's another story. When it comes to sort of like you know, let's face it, Hollywood culture—that's quite different. But this is great music, and the James Bond theme is really, really good. And so this is a really interesting twist. And I also love the languaging. If you think about "Licenced To Slink" instead of "License to Kill," I mean, it'd be nice if you know our culture was a little bit more slinky as opposed to murderery, you know. So I think it was it was. There's a few interesting things that I kind of love about the associations with this in the title, and musically it is just fabulous. There's so much stuff going on. So I've been listening to it, you know, a few times over the last few days preparing, and I'm absolutely love it. So we are gonna, you know, buckle your seatbelts because this is a long ride, and it's a fun and fabulous one. So here we go, Slinky Wizard, Licenced To Slink.

So right away, we have that legato line of the theme, and a voice like sort of you know psychedelic play on it. Some very cool, creative, spacey sounds coming in and out. I love that particular one. We'll be pointing out later. And then the kick, right? Nice light, heart-chakra kind of kick. That's actually really two different figurations, but you know, there's that real Call an answer with those. It's not bass. Notice the rhythm. So many cool sounds. Much more rhythmic at this point. One of the many voices we'll hear coming back. Okay, so this... just that simple, mantra-like... right, this is real, like, peak goa stuff. Very simple mantra. Guttural synthy voice. Now we have human voices gated above it. Very interesting progression. Interesting progression. Love the percussive elements there. Love that psychedelic break that it comes with that sound. How many things are just folding in and out of each other? It's just incredible. I love just the rhythm is just so uplifting and it creates so much momentum. Very interesting little break there. So the whole space really clears for just this otherworldly kind of stuff. And we're back into that good old chug-a-chug-a kind of mode. We got some good old gnarly, grungy kind of stuff. Accenting. Accenting the asymmetry of the consistency with that other bassline is really hypnotic, this. What's amazing is how that voice, that gnarly voice that's continuing, takes on a different flavor when what's around it is different. Notice again the accenting of that bass line. Accent comes on the third beat. All the different frequencies that are at play Calm, semi-break, it's a very spacious, long, meandering storyline here with all these twists and turns.

Now we get that. Cool pause with the kick coming out, and that squelchy sound, and that little up and down. Drumroll. This is a cool little jazzy Riff that comes out of it. Oh, again now we get some variations on this. Sounds like an improvisation. And that squelchy, otherworldly kind of voice. We need more gated voices, don't we? Now it's sort of a little bit more of that evolution of the James Bond theme. What can I say, I mean this is just, you just zone out and trip out on this track, it's Such a long story. It's starting to fill out a little bit more. Notice that one note repeating. And that's squelchy. Very cool up there. You can see stuff there. Okay. Okay. A bit more of that passionate insistence, and the voices just sneaking in there. And we're starting to get that opening riff come back. Really light textures here, eh? Lower voice, gated. The unwinding, just this gentle fade away.

Oh, that. Oh, that really sounds like a sort of a live desk mix, like you know, really like a live set kind of thing where it was, you know, they've got things sequenced, they're doing some stuff live, and it's just, you know, the whole structure just is so go with the flow, right? Every part as is kind of one of the hallmarks of the old stuff that have been saying since the beginning. Every part goes perfectly with every other part, and so they can create this storyline and this engagement and interaction between all these different voices in so many different combinations. So just magnificent, engaged voices, really. I mean, just There's this beauty there.

Keep in mind, this is probably this is two years after Angelic particles came out, which was really the you know that put that kind of sound and that kind of beauty really to the fore. So we get to hear these you know those beautiful voices in some higher, some lower, that smooth legato four note James Online, all this kind of grungy stuff, really spacey sounds. But the thing that stands out for me is how beautiful the whole thing is, and that was one of the things that really got me into this music initially. Is you know when I first wandered in to you know this party in the autumn of '94 in Tokyo was. I can listen to this, you know. I'm not like at a club dancing to something because, well, if you want to go out and you want to go to a dance, then you go and you just sort of tolerate the music. It's like, no, I can actually listen to this. This is creative. This is interesting. And what started coming out more and more was there's actual beauty in some of this music. You know, I actually want to listen to this, and there's something singable and hummable, and there's these melodic hooks that really nab you.

So again, you know, the James Bond theme is very distinctive, and that's something that I think nabbed a lot of folks, and was very distinctive in our culture. So this is something that I think they did a brilliant reworking of it. You know, exploration and expansion and meandering storyline. So bravo, really amazing one. Just a perfect real morning track. Right after you've been through a sort of a storming night, where you know you go through these more placid moments and those moments of intensity. Not a super fast track. I think 136 BPM, if I remember correctly. So not super fast, and that sort of stuff is that's considered slow Nowadays, I mean, we've heard some that are slower than that that can really kick, but just magnificent, beautiful one. Hats off, gentlemen.

Thank you, Gus, for sharing a couple of those memories. And I will sign off here. Next week's going to be 99, and after 99 is 100, so we are getting up there. So I'm glad I could feature 007 for 98, and I'll sign off here, Mark DJ Solitare, leaving you now with the complete shorter edit, CD version, complete nearly 10 minutes version, of Slinky Wizard's beautiful creation, Licenced To Slink.
