Artist: Jaïa
Song: Brainstorm
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 99 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. Okay, so we are rapidly approaching the end of the 96-97 season and episode 100. 7 season, and episode 100 will tie all of that up, and then in 101 we will be looking forward into the 97-98 season. As I've said, it's just impossible to cover all the amazing tracks in that particular 96-97 season because it was really just A jaw-dropping time, unbelievable music being produced by producers who you know I'd been listening to since '94, as well as several new kinds of you know several new projects and different kinds of music that were really evolving. So it was a really exciting time.

I was living in London from September of '96 through I mean I stayed until February '98, and so we'll be covering some of that latter period of my stay. Eight and so we'll be covering some of that latter period of my stay in the next sort of section of of this series after episode one hundred one. But I realized that you know I really could not complete this ninety six ninety seven season without featuring this track. It is the first track I heard of from this project. I didn't have a physical release for this. I got this. It was a French project. One of whom, one member of the duo, is still very active using this name. And the music's seen a great evolution in style and very versatile music making and evolution. But it was the only track I got by them at the time. And it turns out that it was the track was released on a single at some point in '96. I got it either late '96 or you know in the first part of '97, and I used to play this all the time. Absolutely love this track. It made it into just about every set except you know some of the pre-recorded ones, some of the ones that I actually, you know, recorded live during the sets in '98, it's it's not in there somehow. Made it into just about all the other ones. I remember really playing this a lot in Tokyo, also in '98, '99. Brilliant track by Jaya, Brainstorm.

Now the track would eventually be released on this album with a longer ambient be an intro coming in through the from the previous track, but the track itself that I had on DAT just started you know with a clean beginning, and you know I got this from the the chapter president of the French DAT mafia living in Tufnell Park, Emmerich, who got me all kinds of great music, and I got him some great music too. So, but I remember, you know this was as soon as I heard it, I was absolutely in love. And a big part of that is the harmonies that are going on here, as well as the patterns and incredible storyline. There are some really interesting intervals with the melody that gives it a really hypnotic, otherworldly, dimensional feel. So there's going to be, you know, there's a minor third, major third situation that's going on, and it depends if you read this as being E flat minor or E flat major. And yet, you know, looking in that whole realm, there's a perfect fifth and there's a diminished fourth, and all of this, you know, moving between major and minor, right? Sort of whatever it is you find in a major key, and then altering by bringing it down a semitone. Same for a major third minor third. It's just one note down, that little slide down that sort of makes that shift. And there's so much of that going on in this track, and it is just gorgeous. As well as the fact that there's like real voices and synthesized voices and all these wonderful effects and really hypnotic patterns that just create this kind of loop. So, absolute masterpiece. Really, really love this.

I wasn't able to connect with the musician who's still making music under the name Jaya Yanis Kamarinos, and his partner at the time Jean Michel Blanchet left the project. I think around 2000. I have so much that I can share about this track. I've already given you a little bit of the harmonic situation, and Goodness me! I just absolutely love, love, love this track. So I'm really glad I remembered because it wasn't in any of my playlists, and you know it wasn't on a CD that I normally go back to when I'm ripping tracks for my sets. And so now this is permanently in the folder for my retro sets. So Let's give this a listen. Masterpiece, truly phenomenal track by the French duo Jaya. Brainstorm.

Okay, so the the tension of this figuration, and then that slide into the kick. And I love this sort of there's a back and forth and tunnel vision that we get here, and then that upper register rhythmic element, very crisply defined, really effective. All of this stuff is coming up, and then extra little, you know, dimensional sounds going on in the background there to fatten out what's the main riff, and then so that's where we've got the minor third, major third, and the diminished fourth. And then, love that. So you get those bleeps, but there's tension, right? So it's not as light. I mean, it's a lighter sound, but it's it really goes into a hyper-focused dimensional shift. And then. This is again where we get that those amazing intervals, major, minor, and diminished. Then it gets duplicated. You really have the sense of you know there's this whole musical language, this formula that's unlocking patterns in consciousness, very mystical and otherworldly on the dance floor, and pretty good listening just like this also.

Then, so he gets really brings in this human and still kind of almost otherworldly goddess-like energy. This is a brilliant key shift, really well done to a relative key. So it's a very smooth transition for the evolution in the second subject. Same relative patterns, sort of intervals in this relative key. And this relative key. And I love that this is now, you know, synthesized voices really patterns the shaping of language. And then we have human voices. So now we have this male voice to complement the female voice from earlier. And then we. Wonderful use of percussion there. At by this time, I mean, it's just looped so many times, you're just completely hypnotized.

And then, so creative, the storytelling, right? So there's whoosh, and whoosh with a kick, too. And we get some variations on that riff, shifting tonalities. Shifting tonalities. Love that percussive element sort of in that mid-upper frequency. It really gives some texture. Those incredible intervals. Again, that octave duplication, and that original riff is still going underneath it. But you know, when it's padded out with those other layers, it takes on a different kind of flavor. There's that tension in the upper register, just creeping in there. This is really just Phenomenal, explanatory, sky-opening stuff, excitement. And at this point, you know everybody's just you know really at the breaking point I love that that stuff is just pushed past the limit it's a little bit cleaner here at this point and then and those up-and-down figurations are talked about a lot. Again, the way this mimics human speech with its inflection, and the shaping of the phrase.

We'll see you next time, ladies. The Percussion drops out. Still got the tension there, love those, again, the bleeps. Just starts to wind down. Um... The undulating cyber electric ocean of consciousness there. Ooh, my version on that cut out a little bit before that. Didn't have as long in the outro, so I had to be a little bit slicker with the mixes there.

Oh my goodness , what a jaw dropper! I was really getting goosebumps at several times, you know, while we were listening just there. So much going on, right? The the harmonies, a really catchy melodic riff, with those really mystical harmonies, the human voices, male and female, the synthesized voices and the way that riff really sort of would slide in a way that, like a natural vocal inflection, would take place. Incredible use of bleeps, but not in a in a light way. I mean, it would be light, and then it would just go into some really sharp focus to sort of take you somewhere. Incredible modulation to a relative key, and so there was no cheese whatsoever, right? The modulations will sound cheesy when somebody just tries to do a straight modulation instead of doing it to a relative key. If you just go one note down or two notes down, generally it's not going to work. And if you do it a fifth down, never do that. That's one of the rules of classical music: you don't do parallel fifths or parallel fourths.

And I mean, so much more. There's just so much going on here. You know, the the tension, the way there's that vocal quality and that sort of natural lyrical beauty, but then the tension builds up and it starts ramping up, ramping up. Incredible storytelling, a musical masterpiece, and that's going to be showing up in more of my sets coming up soon. Because, oof! Glad to have that back in the folder. Glad to be able to share it. And for episode ninety-nine, I mean, I really played this a ton at the time, and it's really almost amazing that it hasn't been in any of my sets lately. But that will change. So, hats off, gentlemen! Fabulous masterpiece. And next week we are at episode 100, folks. So thank you all for tuning in. I am Mark DJ Solitaire wrapping up here, episode 99, and leaving you without commentary. The complete masterpiece by Jaya Rainstorm.
