Artist: Juno Reactor
Song: Feel the Universe
Year: 1994

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 100 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. And so, 100 episodes has been nearly weekly, just a few breaks when I've been In Europe for the last two summers, and I was of course wondering what can I do for episode 100, as I think I'm now ready to wrap up the 96-97 season largely. I will occasionally go back and check out some other tracks from these periods, but you know, for me it always started in the academic year in September '94 is when I went to my first, you know, my first introductory electronica party. Before hearing Oli in October '94, then September '95, coming back from Canada after a little, just a month break, which I'll actually be talking about in this episode, and then September '96, moving to the U.K. right and being there for a year and a half and so I've been looking at these seasons and we've done about twenty five episodes in the first season ninety four ninety five the same for ninety five to ninety six and then we've done about fifty tracks close to it I think for the ninety six to ninety seven season and so as I thought about you know what to do for this episode? I realize there's a unifying thread that I can weave with one track in three different versions that goes through all three of those seasons. So that's what we're gonna do.

And so this is one of my favorites because the first time I remember owning A Juno Reactor track was on the Return to the Source compilation, which was released in July 1995. So it was just before I had my first summer back in Canada after having been exposed to this whole musical art form and culture, and so on. And I remember I brought it with Me, I brought a few CDs with me because you know I couldn't live without this stuff, and was of course horrified that people in North America were not, by and large, listening to anything like this. Nor did they have any interest. There were some events happening, of course, but certainly nobody I knew was into this. And I absolutely loved upon first hearing this big scale, massive, dramatic Otto Edit of "Feel the Universe" by Juno Reactor. So that came to me in July '95. Well, September, October '95. There's mixed dates for the release date. Juno Reactor's second album came out, "Beyond the Infinite," which has a different mix. The final and the official mix of the "Feel the Universe," and then in '96 and '97, so within about a month or so of moving to the UK, Koxbox released a remix of "Feel the Universe" on the CD single of Juno Reactor's "Conga Fury," which would, you know, then lead into that incredible iconic album, Bible of Dreams, which will be covered in the next season. So, with these three versions of Feel the Universe, I thought let's have a super duper mega power episode where we kind of tie a bow on these three seasons with these three different versions.

So, a little bit of background that is going to require the specs. I had a wonderful call with Ben Watkins, head honcho at Juno Reactor, to whom all thanks for the fantastic intel. And let's see what we say. So, you'll probably have noticed if you're a collector, you don't see a whole lot of Juno Reactor on compilations, and this one is actually for me. This is the only one I'm aware of with Juno Reactor being on a compilation. There might have been some of those German Nova Mute compilations that they were on, but generally not. So, you know, they did this one. It was just before the second album came out. It seems like the promo CD For the second album came out August twenty eighth, ninety five. Then the vinyl and CD had different release dates. Discogs September eighteenth and October first. They did have an album launch party in Tokyo with the Equinox party organization, that then would morph into Solstice with different different management in ninety eight, ninety nine. When I was there, and so they held that. I was in Canada at the time. My sister went to that party, and so so I missed it. But that's you know the album came out afterwards, and then of course you know the Koxbox one came much later.

So four musicians involved here. It was Ben Watkins, Mike Maguire, Stéphane Holweck, who was also part of Electrotete before there was Juno Reactor with Ben and Johann. And so the first three musicians, right, Ben, Mike, and Stefan, were working away. And then Ben thought something was missing, and so he wanted Johann to add a little something. He just thought there was a piece missing, and so Johann came in and gave one of, as he says, one of his very stylized Johann types of things, and it just boof. That was what it needed for everything to crystallize and to fall into place. There's also a very cool sound that I'll be pointing out when we get to it. That is a reverse guitar. So what it is that they do is they recorded onto a twenty-four track tape, reversed the tape, added a reverb or an echo, and then turned it back and sampled it into the Akai sampler.

So this was done. You know, we had an extended conversation. There's going to be a lot more, you know, Juno jewels coming up, obviously, because I actually said I have no idea how I'm going to choose anything from Bible of Dreams. It's already been really hard with some of these albums, choosing just one track. But Ben was in a studio in Shoreditch in London. It was before it was really built up, and he was there from '88 to '97. It was quite isolated. Now I've talked about how at Dragonfly, right, at Butterfly Studios, everybody was working there, and people were coming in and out, and there was all this cross pollination, right? And you know, and even that would happen at their homes, right? Dick Trevor, you know, and Simon Osford walks in and noodles around and creates this riff for the Prana Scarab remix. But Ben was super isolated, and he said he thinks this was a really good thing because they actually, you know, the only visitors were ones who were invited. There wasn't anybody wandering in, and even just geographically, they were separate. And so that kept them in their sort of own ecosystem and their own environment.

And certainly, as I've said in the other Juno Reactor tracks that I've featured, there was nobody like them, right? This was always a different sound. It was at the leading edge. It had, of course, all kinds of elements that we were hearing in this music, but it wasn't it wasn't ever any stereotypical goa or even psychedelic, right? It was made for the people dancing, but it didn't have any of the catchphrases or any of these the kinds of aspects. And I think this is something that's really important because we're starting to see now what I didn't really notice at the time, but what Cooshi spoke to, and I think it was his is compilation let it rip, right? Where goa trance is dead. I wouldn't go as far as to say that, but I think that there was more the fact that people were getting tired of the formula. And the irony now being that you know more than a quarter century later, we've got a lot of formula going on, even more so. So so Juno Reactor has always been Juno Reactor, and I love these three different mixes.

Now Ben has said, you know, he couldn't remember the Otto Edit. He thinks, you know, it's not, wouldn't say it's a different mix per se, but a different edit. The other piece is about compilations. One of the things that they preferred is that the music be heard more in its context, right? So there's always a story. There's always this long arc, and even with all these different sounds and different styles. There's this long narrative arc, and you know there isn't that kind of context when you have a track that comes out and is put in a compilation. Now it can be more like a DJ mix if you know whoever does the compiling and the the organizing does that, but that doesn't often or always certainly happen. Um, so I think that's all of the preamble I'm going to give. So this is going to be a longer episode. Just letting you know. So grab something to drink or eat or snack or whatever, or get your dancing shoes on, because we're going to listen to all three versions in the course of this episode before with my commentary, and then all three versions at the end.

Okay. So the Otto Edit is shorter. It lacks some of the key musical elements from the album mix, and it works in its own way, definitely. And in fact, this is the one that I've tended to play out. It might be that it's just because you know it hits a certain spot for me because it's the first time that I heard it, and it just blew me into another dimension really quite quickly, as I will be speaking to when we listen to it. But that's the one I've often played, and so we're going to start off with that one, of course, because it's the one that chronologically came first. So here we go, Juno Reactor, Feel the Universe, the Otto Edit, and so this beautiful, soft, angelic kind of line, with some other interesting noise in the background. Some neat little upper frequency pieces. Very key sample. That feeling the unit was functioning. Then this, and then all of a sudden it all breaks loose. I mean, not much of an intro, right? It's just like, oof, you're there, and you're really feeling the universe with this. I love the clanging. It's like you know, this this almost this chaos going on in the universe, and with all of those sweeps going up, and then that is the reversed guitar sample. Sounds like whales or some kind of aliens, as does that gated voice. Alt All sounds like voices, doesn't it? And do listen to everything in the context, as if this was a voice speaking a language that's not your own. And. All this great percussion going on in Juno's tracks. Wonderful, dramatic, beautiful intervals. Go up to a six. Then. Then. Cool rhythmic break. Notice that rumbling bassline now. This hypnotic drone of that beautiful nasal synth, which again sounds very slight if you're hearing it well. Again, we just get this loop, this is not hypnotic mantra before it breaks out. Voice is everywhere a higher level there I noticed this very clever break here, and another one. Now we have more existential angst coming in. A little echo on that, then that higher one, then that lower one, then that lower one, that higher one for the third one. Isn't that beautiful? Signature. Those intervals, that little riff, and the rhythm with it. These sounds really like ships in outer space that are passing you. And you know these sounds again. It doesn't sound like anything terrestrial in terms of instrumentation. Right, so extra effects is a nice explanation. It's a nice explanation. Then the last one, and we're back to that opening chord, which is, I believe, a third above the tonic. The main, the main key. It's beautiful and lyrical and.

Okay, I mean, you know, it doesn't take long for things to get going there, does it? It's just that very placid beginning, and a couple of sounds that come in, and then bam—you're right in the middle of this, you know, massive intergalactic drama. I mean, really, I mentioned a space opera, you know, when I talked about high-energy protons from their first album, and this is you know Juno Reactor stuff is dramatic and it is operatic. Most opera is pretty dramatic if you've ever seen an opera. You can stay awake for it. This is much more interesting, and I mean, it's real. There's like just incredible intensity, and it is quite orchestral. I find right. I mean, the sounds that they're choosing. I mean, that sounded very. That sounded more string-like. The rest of the instrumentation, other than the percussion, really didn't sound like it came from this planet. And that's where it really adds, together with you know the wonderful harmonies. Again, there's minor and major and perfect intervals there, and it's just powerful, powerful music making.

So then the album mix. This is another story. There's a similar introduction for part of it, but then we're going to get a bass line which is absent from the version that we just heard, and it is interesting as well because one as well because it's again above the tonic. The bass line is not in the main key. It's above. I made note of it somewhere, what it is, but you know you're getting a third and a fifth in there, third, fourth, and fifth, and it's kind of this oscillating pattern, and so your, it it keeps a little bit of suspense because you know it's not quite grounded in the main key of the track, uh, so it is pretty interesting and it changes the mood significantly and then the whole story as well. It takes longer to build up to the big dramatic crash, which you know you just get right away. No, no faffing about, as the Brits would say, in the first version. No pussyfooting around, no sort of you know hanging around and seeing what's going to happen. It's just like boom, right in there. This one, there's a longer dramatic arc, and again, some of these harmonic differences I find make a very big difference in the tone of the track. So, how about we give this a listen? The album mix from *the incredible Beyond the Infinite* album of *Feel the Universe*. So, starts off right. We have the same sort of little chomped-up pattern with that beautiful, with the same strings and that sample, and we've got also those outer space sort of vehicle sounds. Second time, and then so we get this bass line where it's like something wicked this way comes because it's again it's not resting on the tonic; it's above. Right, and then we have that other bass line underneath it. Quite an alien-sounding alternating percussive piece there, and then that. All that stops. Again, this is familiar from the other one. And those high-energy protons—they're melting. Key change. Again, dramatically changes the tone. And he zaps. Very science fiction. These zaps, very science fiction, and it breaks up the rhythm, right? You can't really fully predict what's going on, right? So it helps give you something that's not on the strong beats, and they're also oscillating left and right, and that extra voice as well, along with these key changes. Then, this is what leads into the drama. Note up. Those sweeps as well, then clattering, and again, again that sort of sandy existential alarm as we're feeling the universe functioning, and those other voices, super operatic. I'm getting that kind of Greek, chorus kind of theatrical element. And all these cries and screams. Really this intense emotion. You know, just a... really this intense emotion. Then you have this interval here, I guess. Real Juno rubbery sound there, which we recognize from some other tracks. Percussion. That's him. How's that? What is that? A little rhythm there. Use that tie, bring up some electric frequencies there. Super cool intervals. I like that sort of gated, oscillating, synthesized voice. Bassline again. This is the most similar part to the previous version. That mantra like repetition. Seven, eight, eight. Again, the third one being higher, fourth one back down. Really sounds like this distrust call, right? Like hitting all these frequencies that send a coded message. Super spacey sounds. Love this. So much different material and such a dramatic story, content, dramatic as well. Cyber guitar from outer space. And those spaceships. Different this part, and so it goes back to what we heard before in this section. Back fry is going to come on a different beat in the next round. Back to that the calm before and after the storm I mean, you know, what a story. Both of them, right? So both versions, different arrangement, and you know this one has some more content that's not present in the other one and builds up to it more, and you know the structural aspects are quite different. I really think that baseline, that oscillating baseline, that as I said is you know the base of that is third above the tonic, gives a very different atmosphere. As do some of the key changes and shifts in it. So really, really interesting to hear those differences for me. Again, you know my imprinting was from the Otto Edit. That was the first one that I heard, and then I heard the album. I was like, "Oh, this is different." I think the engineering is much clearer as well. It seems much more forward, so it has you know more presence as well. This version on the album.

So then, a year later, we get Koxbox doing their remix, and that was only issued on originally the Conga Fury single. So Conga Fury, there's a whole other story that we'll get to later on. But I remember, you know, it was in my first month in the UK. This was released, and I went to a party at the fabled, if in my opinion somewhat dreadful, Tyson Street in October, and this had just been released, and I think all three DJs that night played this mix because it's like, oh my God, it's Juno Reactor and it's a Koxbox mix of Juno Reactor. This has never happened before. Now, you know, they were all Koxbox and Juno Reactor were friendly. Ben said his recollection is, you know, they met them and they suggested the remix, and they were both on Blue Room at the time, and so you know, Blue Room made it official and you know had them commissioned for this remix, and then they provided it. And of course, in Koxbox, you know, true Koxbox tradition, it's different. Everything Koxbox did was different, you know. And that's the whole thing. Again, back then, you know, everybody really had their different signature sounds, and this is a fine example of it. So it'll be interesting for us as we're listening, after hearing those two different versions done by the original Juno folks, what it is that Koxbox chooses in terms of what elements to feature, and then how they change that and make make them their own.

So let's listen now to Koxbox's remix of Juno Reactor's "Feel the Universe." Some slightly different sounds here in the opening, but a similar kind of dramatic right introduction. Right introduction. Interesting sort of three notes there, and then the the split. Different kind of alien voice this time, right. Again, it's like it's really sending you a message. Then, way more like metallic stuff going on up there. Not a Juno sound check at all. Very much right now. This is a stock strike. There's the bassline. How many different elements, right? There's a little lyrical legato here, but we have mostly stuff that's really that upper frequency, those voices that are quite separate. A lot more upper frequency as a general trend. And here are what was going to be coming, and there's Psychopod music as well, right? In the Universal Mind. What we've already heard in Too Pure, which I didn't cover yet. There's some key intervals from the try. And those alien space sounds. We get some some of the drama. It's going to come down again. That's going to be a key part of the closing of the track. Now, Koxbox fans will recognize Too Pure Stratosfear and Stratosfearless. Whole other alien language, different breed from the original. Completely headbending. Build up. This is where we get a little bit of the Juno drama, but with that Cox box sort of sleek. Drama but with that uh Koxbox sort of a sleek uh synth styling let me get that just aerated in the background a little bit of a Zamfir-like alien synth sound key change then, the key riff is brought in, with the key change, same the bassline, same progression, and that. Now different content from where that similar stuff happened in the original. Bassline shift there, and that key change. Very cool incorporation of that riff. That upper frequency stuff is wild, eh? Bit of a call and answer going on there. Yeah, I mean, I hated this. Now that's different, isn't it? A little to bring that rhythmic stuff in before this some of these voices, and that true alien, Koxbox, Psychopod kind of synth sound. And we have that descending riff, which is again kind of this anguish in there, and that reworking that they did, and that beautiful sheen-like, shiny sort of sound. Can we start unwinding? Wow, I mean, of course, nobody knew what hit them when that dropped in October '96. Of course, nobody knew what hit them when the other versions dropped either. I mean, as we heard, all super powerful. That is, of course, I mean a true remix in the sense of like it is, you know, not it's a complete reworking. I mean, it's a completely different track, um, with a very different sound signature. So it's not like you know somebody went to the same studio and's using the same instrumentation. This is very much their sound, their vision, just taking some key riffs and, you know, not everything from the original. And what an interesting track that is! Again, some of those really key hallmarks from you know, it's so interesting looking back when we now know some of the later output, right? Because after this, Stratosphere and Stratosphereless would be released, Universal Mind as you know released as Psychopod, but you know, same musicians, and we can hear some of those elements, right? So really, I mean, super creative, fascinating music making, and of course, you know, all hail the original mix and that side edit that was the first version of "Feel the Universe" that I came across.

Absolutely stellar, and as a title, let's face it: those of us who were at these parties then, and I think anybody who's into this music, you know, whenever it is that you were introduced to it in the right setting, in the right frame of mind, we have had that state of feeling the universe and feeling just absolutely connected to the sound, to the people, to what it is that we're looking at, to what it is that we're thinking, and just having everything be, in a sense, one thing. So it's definitely one that brings up, I think, a lot of emotion because it's got that dramatic feel, and it's got, you know, as I've been saying so many times, major and minor intervals in the riffs, which really adds that emotional depth and twist because it's not just happy or said, it's a blend. We very rarely have one emotion at the same time only, right? And happiness can be tinged with some other, um, some other flavors, and that's what we get in this music. And with Juno Reactor, I mean, it's drama at warp speed. So really, space opera kind of stuff.

So there we are, episode one hundred. I want to thank, I will thank Ben from Juno Reactor for sharing some great memories and insights about the process and about their music. I want to thank everybody who's been watching these episodes, leaving comments, sharing all of the other musicians who've shared so far over the course of the previous ninety-nine episodes, and there is more to come. I have definitely got a doozy planned for 101. I've been waiting for this to be able to share this. This is from now. We're going to start moving next week into from the autumn of '97 through to the end of the summer of '98, and another massive period in the evolution of this music. So I look forward to that. Before then, I will sign off now and leave you with the three versions that we had of "Feel the Universe" by Juno Reactor: the Otto Edit, the album mix, and the Koxbox remix.
