Artist: Infernal Machine
Song: Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle
Year: 1997

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 104 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. The series is right now in the '97 to '98 season, so it's tracks that I first heard in or that were released in from like roughly September '97 through to the end of the summer of '98.

So at this period in '97, I was still living in London. Left in February '98. In March, moved back to Tokyo, and was there for a year and a half. So there's a few different places that are involved. Of course, there's always stories. I think we all know that we all had stories, right? All of you who are watching this. When did you first hear this track? What were what were the circumstances? And that's something I always love to share.

And this one, I remember when I first heard it. I remember when I first got it. I remember when I first played it, and that was recorded. And it's really something. And it's one that I still do play, and it is just a masterpiece. So it is on this beautiful, amazing compilation by Twisted Records, the first compilation that they came out with, Dementertainment, genius name, and it's the third track on there by Infernal Machine, Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle. Infernal Machine, Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle, affectionately known as Chainsaw for short.

And where I first heard this, the circumstances are kind of funny in retrospect. There was a TIP label party in November, I think, 1997. It's actually documented somewhere, and I forgot to look it up, but I'm pretty sure. Ninety-seven. It's actually documented somewhere, and I forgot to look it up, but I'm pretty sure it was it was around then. Was in Acton in London, and I remember that is when Shanti, at the age of like thirteen or something, was playing this DAT set. Absolutely incredible, just amazing, high energy, phenomenal mixing. Just like wow, totally blew everyone away.

And then Tristan played. Tristan was a remarkable DJ, right after Solips in ninety. Tristan was a remarkable DJ, right? After Solips in '99, everybody was talking about Tristan's DJ set. Right, he was fantastic DJ, and he played this track that was like, oh, it's unbelievable, and I was just completely going wild. And Simon Posford was there, and I was next to him. I was like, oh my god, this track is incredible. I wonder if it's one of his new ones. And he says, actually, it's one of mine. And I was like, is there a hole I can crawl into and just slink away, like a wizard or not? Anyway, not definitely putting my foot in my mouth in that one. I was like, "Oops." So I hadn't heard it, obviously, and I did, and it made quite an impression, and it's made quite an impression since. Every time I've heard it, and every time I've played it.

So this is one of the handful of tracks that Simon produced with Dick Trevor of the Green Nuns. So you'll remember that the first Infernal Machine single had The Loin Sleeps Tonight and the Loin King. The Loin King was actually a solo track that Simon produced before the return to the Source Party in New York at September '96. The other side was a collaboration, still is, still exists, with Dick Trevor. They also worked together on The Jiggle of the Sphinx, if I recall correctly. I think that's the one on the Lone Deranger album, even though it was released as a Hallucinogen track. And this one, I believe, is the final collaboration they did, and they should do more. It's a shame they didn't.

But Dickster told me that this one was done at Chris Boing's house. Now Chris is a guy with a great sound system, fabulous, fun fellow who was always around back in the day. Very close friends with Dick, and they had a he had a studio there. And Dick said there was a little bit of decadence here because he had two Roland TB-303s, and so at the end of it, there's two of them. There's one going on each channel, and he said, you know, back then when people had so little equipment, you know, having one was already great, but they had two of them. So he said it was just a little bit over the top and extra that they were doing almost the same thing, left and right, but not exactly.

And, you know, with the sound and the title, well, I mean, we think about a chainsaw, Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle. There is a chainsaw that you can hear in the open, and it's sampled throughout. Simon said, of course, it's gated, right? Angelic chainsaw for Angelic Particles fans with that gating. So, so that's kind of the main deal here.

I'm going to play it, and then I'm going to also give you a little bit. There's a little bit of Background where there's some inspiration from where the track came from. It's useful to know sometimes what it is the producers were listening to and what it is that gave them a little bit of inspiration. So that will come after we listen to this track.

So, so that was November-ish, right? '97. I left in February '98, And I'm not sure if it was then or a little bit after that I've I started writing the press releases for um for Twisted and I did for this one and so I got a bunch and I can't again I can't remember if it was before or after I left if it was maybe when I got to Japan I had like six or seven of promos of this in a in sleeves to give around to a couple of DJs but also to try to find licensing in Japan Which didn't end up happening, but I sure was like in love with every track on this compilation. Still am. I think it's one of the groundbreaking ones in terms of variety and just you know incredible, incredible music.

And this has long been one of my favorites, not just from that initial exposure. I mean, it's really There's a depth and power. It's got this incredible combination of darkness, depth, right? So sort of we can look at you know, and we usually imagine that's kind of down, but it's also uplifting, and that good old you know that word I use a lot, celebratory. I mean, it really does have that. So it's got these contrasting, you know, what we would often call conflicting elements, but they're not conflicting, right? They're working together. And I've said it before, and I'll say it again: this is one of the things that I think is among the defining characteristics of the music in the scene that we love so much. Is that it so beautifully unifies opposing qualities and brings them together. And you know, we're at a time when humanity really needs that, right? Opposites can Work well together. This is my feng shui consultant self coming out with a yin and yang aspect.

So I think with that we'll get started. Give this wonderful track a listen, and then I will give a little bit more background into its inception, inspiration, and then you'll get a chance to listen to it without my commentary.

So let's give a listen to " Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle by the Infernal Machine. Love this beautiful lyrical introduction. This is great for mixing as well, right? Because you've got that—you're able to sort of overlay this over something else, another track.

So you can hear the chainsaw noises there. Then this baseline. And then this bass line that comes in, amazing bounce, and again this is where the creativity is really required nowadays, people spend time writing a melody, spend time writing a bass line and then we get that kick and that slam and then syncopated then, syncopated, sort of a hi-hat kind of sound. Notice all the different rhythmic elements happening. That bass line just keeps going, right? So it's a melody that keeps things going. Going, then this riff, then and we, that two note pattern at the top is going to be more brought out more shortly. So right now it's just kind of implied.

Notice the rough, grungy, sort of dark, gnarly quality to it, like that. I love that rhythm, and then, just cavernous, absolutely massive at night, outdoors or indoors. And this sound starts coming in, right? Which we would start really hearing an The Lone Deranger, Gamma Goblins, this kind of sound. We also show up in Shpongle. Then the good old tweaked, weak distorted kind of you know melodic inferred but not overt with the pitch with the notes rather it's going to get tweaked up over here breaking the kick kick. Brilliant. In. It's that woodblock rhythm. Needs more cowbell. Wood block is pretty cool. Woodblock is pretty cool. That rise.

And now comes the... And it's going to start coming in more pronounced. Right, so this climbing pattern with those two notes at the top, which is the minor seven pentatonic, G and an A. Then, again that sort of guttural, growly, nighttime exclamatory element. Now it's really super clear, right? So it's, like, been coming into focus throughout the track. All the stuff going off at the same time.

Then this beautiful bit here, then this. It's like everything's building up to this exclamatory, like, Reminder, this is really again like this cosmic reminder from the center of the galaxy to wake you up. And those two notes is the reversal of what we heard before. It's an A going down to a G, before we had the G going up to the A. There's a rhythm that's added to it that adds some emphasis, and we've got our double 303s going on. It just keeps climbing. Again, it's one of those you just think it can't get more intense, and it keeps going. Just the ...rhythmic drive and tension. Another level there with that growly grunge.

And you're just like, how many times is this going to go on, and you just end up in this hypnotic loop, soaking up the message. And then, the unwinding, which will be quite literal, drum buildup. And this is one of the most wonderful endings for a track. Everything just melts, slows down. I mean, what a stormer! Really pretty unique track. Um, really pretty unique track.

Um, the double 303s were really doing it, and I mean the chainsaw too. But that incredible exclamatory, like enthusiastic but still dark, right? So celebratory but sort of again a bit angst-ridden kind of quality there, where um, you know they had that, you know the two notes that was off pitch there when I did it, but a G and an A, right? So it's a minor, it's an A minor. That's a minor seventh up to the main key, and then at the end, right in that final section, it was reversed. So it was the upper note then the lower note. So really fascinating reversal, playing with the rhythm as well simultaneously, and just all this stuff going on.

And it's not like anybody's analyzing it and saying, " Oh well, if you sort of you know take the minor seven to do, just doing what sounds good. But what's fascinating is you know once you hear that, I always find it interesting things like you know how patterns change and you know that note reversal was was kind of cool and it was still uplifting, even though it was going down. But right on the first part, that upward motion, that upward momentum, really brought a lot of a lot of enthusiasm.

Now, the ending of that, by the way, I think is really pretty cool. Now, of course, you can do your old beat mixing thing out of it before that sort of downward slide and slowdown happens. But those of you who've heard me play and heard me talk about this know that I'm really into the whole ongoing line and story, and I think that you can use something like this well to do creative mixing.

And something that happened the first time I played this in Tokyo, when this was still unreleased, was I did this slide that, and it was completely unrehearsed. I'd never practiced it, but this is again where you know we used to just feel so inspired in the moment back then. I was like, What's going to go with this? What's going to go with this? And I put on The Delta, Travelling at the Speed of Thought. I was like, what's gonna go with this? What's gonna go with this? And I put on Delta, traveling at the speed of thought, and did this blend that just went in, you know, the the pitch bend going in with the what was coming in in the other track.

And I've copied this before because it was like, well, I mean, this works really well. It's a great pairing, but I never quite achieved the actual blending between the voices that happened back then. And that's again, you know, where just happens to be, you know, magic happens in the moment, and sometimes it's captured. And I was glad because that set was recorded, and so sometimes listen to, like, how did I do those levels? How did he do that mixing? I don't know. I just kind of did it.

And then in Ozora last summer, I played out of this one and did that slow mix into the opening of LSD. Did the full? I'd been sort of keeping the kick going more consistently throughout all of that, and then this was an opportunity to do that blend.

And I bring this up, I bring this up because I just think that as DJs as well, right, musicians writing this music, I think it's great to create an opportunity for mixing that's other than beat mixing. I think DJs can really use that creatively. Just because you can, with a technology or with your skill, blend everything with a kick continuing to go doesn't mean you should all the time. Like think about the flow. It's not just about I'm doing a perfect mix and I'm mixing everything perfectly. It's like what do the dancers need? What does the music call for? And what is possible?

And after a track like that, where you're dancing so ecstatically, I think having that break to really come down and you know you really start to Feel, you know, what it is that you've gone through as you've been listening. I think that's, I think it's really important. So that's why I really enjoy doing those kinds of long mixes, and the crowd actually does love that kind of thing.

Getting to Simon's inspiration, there was a, assuming we would call them techno, a band called Sulfurex, who had a 1994 track called Point Break. I'm going to listen to the first 40 seconds or so, and you're going to hear some of the patterning and some of the dark grunginess that you can hear as inspiration and the kick, which Simon said I'm pretty sure we sampled the kick from this one. So let's just give this a quick listen.

Right, so interesting rhythm, right? Sounds familiar, and then very loud hi hat for a track from 1994 and then that same kind of boomy warehouse rave kind of track uh kick nice pause and then you can sort of hear the inspiration for how right in Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle, and that sort of growly. So you get a little sense of some of the inspiration, right? So the kick was apparently sampled, but you can also hear some of the rhythmic elements.

But nothing's created in a Vacuum, right? There was always inspiration. Everybody who went out to parties were, you know, folks were hearing riffs and hearing things that were, you know, that inspired them. So, nice little hat TIP.

I do remember that Simon let Oli know about this track and gave it to him, and Oli played this at Solips in 1999. I remember that one. So, Yeah. Anyway, pretty wild, interesting, basic 1994 track, but certainly has that has that oomph. But I think nothing really beats the oomph of that Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle that we heard. Real power.

So you're going to get to hear it now as I wrap up and stop talking and let you hear the whole thing without my commentary. So I'm Mark DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode 104 of Retro Goa Explorations, and leaving you now with the Infernal Machine's gorgeous, celebratory, dark, broody, expansive, explosive, uplifting, Nocturnal Chainsaw Kerfuffle.
