Artist: X-Dream
Song: Radio (X-Dream Remix)
Year: 1998

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 107 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So today, a legendary track, but with a twist. The original version of this track is probably better known than this remix, and to say that I prefer the remix over the original would be an act of riotous understatement.

I remember when it's again one of those experiences when I was over visiting Richard DJ Purple in Tufnell Park as part of our little Tufnell Park trance mafia crew was over at his place, and I've told you before about how when I first heard as a child I could walk on the ceiling, I wasn't immediately taken with it, and I remember he had on DAT around the same time, and so this is a year before it was released, a track by X-Dream, which he was raving about, and I put it on, and I thought, oh, this is all cool, like this all these radio noises and everything, and the sample, and it was really interesting. I hated the track, absolutely did not get it. Uh, didn't like these voices that were in there. I didn't like the patterning.

I just Didn't take to it at all, zero interest. And this is where, you know, at the time, I was starting to see a shift away from some of the patterns that I really loved in the music that I first fell in love with in '94. I was sort of hearing a move away from melodic content, certain chords, certain harmonies, and so on. And of course, there's a lot of these other kinds of music that I really do love and did Also back then, and have come to love even more, you know, more abstract stuff, stuff that's not overtly melodic, and so on.

So, that said, I just never really took to Radio; just didn't like it. And, you know, I listened to it a bit before filming this episode. Still not crazy about it, but the remix. Okay, so I've got stories about this.

So, I've told the story. This is how I found, you know, that Starbuck track was, and also I mentioned the same situation when I presented Johann's, you know, that track from Johann's album Life's Games. That just before leaving London in February 1998, I'd been in touch with somebody at Blue Room who just sent me this Believable care package. I'm going to be unpacking this care package still for a few episodes, and in it was this gorgeous single.

That first of all, I mean, just look at the artistic work here, right? This was all done by Simon Ghahary, who ran the label. And I mean, absolutely love this. And I was like, okay, Radiohead, as opposed to Radio.

You know, we Give it a listen, of course, because I was sent it. Oh my gosh, so much better! Absolutely, immediately took to this version. And you know, I remember specifically in April, May the that year, '98, when it was in Japan.

I remember the day that I spent in the park in Harajuku, Yoyogi Park, and then walked to Shibuya, my favorite district. Walked into the Cisco Techno shop and saw that Radio, the album, was available. And of course, immediately bought it. And, you know, saw, oh, okay, the first track is the original mix, and not the remix.

And was bitterly disappointed because, to be honest, I really, really think this one is much better. But Going a little bit before that, I only had really one kind of public gig when I was living in London. The rest of them were all private, you know, sort of hangout affairs, you know, nothing with a cover charge or anything like this. But I played at this party in I think December 1997 with Jez Laughing Buddha, and I forget.

I know Purple was there, I know Toast was there, but I don't think they played. And they might have done. Richard might have played. You'll have to remind my jog my memory, but I remember seeing them on the dance floor.

It was kind of a higher DJ booth. And before the gig, I went to the Twisted office and said, "Oi, got anything that I can play?" And he's like, "Oh, I've got this remix of Radio." I was like, "Don't want that, right?" Because I just didn't like the original. If only I had known. This is where it pays, folks.

Actually, give it a listen, right? Don't prejudge, because I would have played the heck out of this track, and I did in later periods and later parties, right? So my first party in Tokyo, under the name DJ Solitaire in May '98. This is one of the tracks early in the In my set, and I did a really long, spacious mix and played like the full introduction because it just absolutely ties in and holds.

I remember the crowd just standing there and really, you know, tuning in themselves. So, so this single, I mean, for me, I mean, this is a work of art, visually and musically as well. And there's a couple of remixes by others on here. I'm just gonna say, look at the look at the beautiful CD.

It's gorgeous. I know there's Der Dritte Raum and I forget who else, but you know, again for me, it's just like this is this is just it. And so that's the one I'm gonna play today. I still think it's one of the all-time great ones, and it's also thematically really quite brilliant.

And of course, you know that quality is there in the original, I just think the structure of this one, I think the riffs, I think how things are coordinated. There was a sort of a panting sort of voice in the original that I just I didn't like the way it was done, and I much prefer how this one is done. The harmonies and the you know again structure works way better for me. This is another occasion when Marcus and Jan of X-Dream, who are only referred to as Rough and Rush on the album, which is interesting because they went by those names much earlier.

This is another time when they made use of samples from that documentary from which the "As a Child, I Could Walk on the Ceiling. Came from Dialogues with Madwomen, and so we have. It was immediately after the lady who, as a child, could walk on the ceilings. There's another individual who's interviewed, and she states the very familiar sample that's in this track, and also continues.

And there's a couple of other samples familiar to you. If you know the album Radio, just give a little listen and look. Thing of having like almost having a radio station inside your, or several radio stations inside your head. Um, what does that feel like?

Oh, it feels great. It slips out of your control when it starts to slip out of your or what you think is your control, and when it gets to that point, it starts to get a little scary. It it's tiresome to have not be able to turn the radio station in your head off. You know, I can imagine.

Really, I've been told I start to not be easily Comprehensible. I'm not incoherent, but it's hard to understand because things are moving so fast in my head that I'm starting to edit like a telegram. Right. So you'll recognize from the last track, "Out of Your Control," and also from Telegram.

Right. So it's the same lady sharing. I just did a little bit of editing because it was a bit of a longer interview there, but you can hear a little bit more of what she was talking about. And you know the whole theme really ties in with something I spoke about, probably in the first episode, of the series, but certainly since, which is that I always had this the impression that the DJ was like tuning in some cosmic radio, you know, and they were beaming messages out and We're tuning messages in, and so this whole concept of radio and signal and noise and so on was quite early on, very clearly in in my mind.

So, so with that, how about we give a little listen to? And it's interesting; it's called the Radiohead remix because it's or Radiohead, I mean, because instead of just Radio remix, so it's kind of a different title. And Radiohead was also a band, right? So it's a bit of an unusual choice of title, but we're going to listen to X-Dream's, let's call it Radiohead, and just enjoy its absolute mastery.

So that all kinds of cool noises, including that voice that doesn't sound particularly human, and Then after all this upper signal, that low hum comes in. It's got a much more ominous tone to it. I love the rhythm to it. We're still going to hear some upper sounds.

So again, you know, it's like you're inside. You know, Your own circuitry is exposed, and we have this beautiful slide that's happening while these other sounds are going on. This is all just incredible introduction. Those cool sounds coming in.

Love the way some of these are going up. And then the voices again, rather those, that slide, and then... There the kick comes. This revolves, keeps, keeps you on edge when it's going to start.

And a very simple pattern, so it was kind of up, And then down, and then this other voice starts coming in. So again, that kind of call and answer, classic pattern. Pause. So I love that it's you know this slower, just one note, one utter, one Utteration, if we could call it that.

Utterance. There's a beautiful chorus that's gonna come in. Love that. Way more mystical And magical for me than than the original.

In that just that mantra-like riff repetition and that good old extreme chug-a-chug-a. Again, the the pacing and the structuring and the storytelling here is just exquisite. And again, you know the way goes. There's the shaping.

The way it goes down. Throw in And the clarity and the transparency. This is where X-Dream's engineering was just on a whole other level back then. They always have been, but this is.

And this slide here. Brilliant. And then see the way those radio sounds are sort of emerging from that. A different note that it goes up to.

Really, again, this is like this deep, dark voice from the void. Slow motion. And now this voice starts building. I don't know if you can see the voices.

It's just almost outside of the frequency range, just the interplay of all the sounds. This is a long line, like this long slow motion alien communication. Think of the movie Arrival. That chugga chugga.

So all these different frequencies again that are filled with different content, such transparency. Love that voice. Then, just the first part. Still gets me confused after 25 plus years.

I think now we have both parts. There we are. Storytelling, right? Just the way all of this is laid out over this grand structure.

That high frequency. Now we start with the unwind, And then it will fizzle out quite beautifully. Wow! And then, of course, in the album, they did that brilliant concept of having radio noise between each track, so like each one was on a different station.

It's just fantastic, fantastic concept. And you know what interested me about the album was, You know, Extreme has so many different styles, and they, you know, what we what we heard before in their earlier releases, you know, a lot more melodic and upbeat, and so on. And there's this real turn towards these darker sounds, and there's still some. They've got a little bit of that, sort of, you know, more upbeat and melodic, but not as much in the album.

But some other singles that were coming out around this time also we're gonna be listening to because they are amazing, and you just you know there could be this whole other kind of album if a couple of those had been in, and I'm not complaining, right? Radio is incredible. I'm complaining a little bit about you know that first track, and I wish this one had been the opening track of this version as opposed to the other one, but that's me. Um, but wow, what masters!

I'm really needing to space apart all of the tracks that Marcus was involved in, because you know there's Delta, there's Delta, and there's you know this one, and there's more you know collaborative stuff that's coming, and so you know I don't want to do them all in a row. But holy moly, this one really hit me, and especially when it was because I think it was close to a year after I heard, really quite early on, in Purple's DAT of the you know the original Radio track, and just not liking it, and just really not digging it, and then completely blown away and we're not worthy, you know, in admiration of this phenomenal, phenomenal mix, which is just you know one of my mega favorites of all time. So so there we go. So I am going to tune out of you know this particular part of the presentation and let you tune in fully to the entire amazing track without my blabbering over it.

So and tune in also next time for more. I'm Mark DJ Solitare wrapping up episode 107 of Retro Goa Explorations and leaving you now with X-Dream's remix of their classic “Radio,” the X-Dream remix from the Radiohead single. I'm having a radio station inside here, or several radio stations inside your head.
