Artist: Psychopod w/Graham Wood
Song: Friagram
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 108 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So this is the first time I'm featuring this project in this particular season. We're now in the autumn of '97 through to the summer of '98 season, and yet this track actually did have an appearance in the previous season, not in my not in my series, but I could have included it, but I'm including it now because it had its second release as part of a kind of semi-album. It was termed an EP, and it showed up earlier, you know, in May '98. No, sorry, May '97, roughly, on a TIP compilation, and then came out on an extended EP.

This beauty by Psychopod, and absolutely glorious track Called Freyagram. Now Psychopod was comprised of Ian Ion and Frankie, but in this track they also worked with Graham Wood of The Infinity Project fame, truly underappreciated musician. I mean, absolutely astonishing. And the name of the track actually is a composite of their three names: Freyagram, Frankie, Ian, Graham. Isn't that kind of cool? So that's what Graham told me back when I met him in 2012, and my jaw really completely jaw dropped because I was like wow, and your jaw and everything else might drop when you hear this track if you're not familiar with it, and even if you are familiar with it, this is some really absolutely next level music making.

So you know I think there has been a lot of atonal right like non traditional harmonic, you know, dissonance—the use of, you know, what we hear in 20th-century classical music when you know things started getting more into the 20th century, where there would be notes that aren't considered melodious or, you know, what's sort of shaped like a melody, but it actually isn't something you would sing. Or the harmonic accompaniment has some dissonance based on, you know, sounds that we generally consider to be pleasing or not. So this is where things start getting abstract, right? So 20th century composers, Stravinsky started doing this. You know, then it started moving into you know really wild and wacky stuff with Schoenberg and other composers.

And this track is one where there's a lot of dissonance and it's magnificent because it's really this is where we're getting into, um, you know some pretty abstract, otherworldly, non-earth-based sounds and melodic structures and harmonic structures, and it's absolutely fantastic. So this is, you know, if you're creating a story, well, then you go from that really melodic stuff into sort of that really, you know, just starts getting more and more into, you know, extraterrestrial, and then, you know, maybe come back to Earth. But this one is really out there. It's absolutely, truly, totally cosmic, and it's a real favorite.

So you know, Coxbox was already you know when we listened to some of that early stuff from the end of that first album, "Forever After." You know, there's that beauty, but also those otherworldly sounds. You know, that very streamlined sheen. Streamlined sheen—it's very hard to pronounce this. You know, the sheen, this glistening quality to their sounds, and here we're getting a little bit of that, as well as a little bit, you know, a little bit of gritty edge, which all of these musicians were able to bring to their to their music, and just a wonderful, Fun, absolutely pushing the limits kind of track with these great musical minds all working together. So, I don't think there's much more that I can say beforehand. I mean, you know, the combination of putting the names to the you know characters of their names together to create this title is just the beginning of the incredible creative work that went into this production.

So, let's give this a listen . "Beauty" by Psychopod with Grandwood Fryagrand. So again, we can hear you know some dissonance here. Not exactly a singable melody, right? So it's on the edge of of that kind of thing. You know, Notice the creative use of the drums, just that riff that keeps repeating, and there's going to be a beautiful slide into the main. Beautiful bounce, and then get those wild, wishy sounds, that upper note there, and this is all just abstract, otherworldly. You're completely in outer space, kind of sounds. I mean, comical, just really hilarious, otherworldly stuff.

And then we're starting to get into the melodic stuff now. Just that interval, and the shaping of it, and the instrumentation. This upward bounce is really marvelous. It gets duplicated with those very famous cockspock Psychopod pan flutes. Which is completely from another dimension. So we get these little bits of harmony and melody interspersed with all this insanity. So we have the rhythm, that dissonance, that edge to the something that's shaped like a melodic line, but just is not based on our harmonic system. I love the way those two, the atonal and the tonal interplay.

And again, the amazing storytelling, where you know you get this presentation, and then there's this meandering storyline. Wait, what are those sounds? This is kind of coasting a little bit, right? So I mean, there's the the intensity that was coming before, and again you're sort of catching your breath before the next big chapter. Beautiful development. You know, this is a real uplifting melody that you really typical for both Psycopop Box Box and The Infinity Project. For both Psychopath Coxbox and The Infinity Project, the way it starts tweaking. There's there's a little bit of a wobbly kind of sound in the background there. More tweaking going on there.

Rhythm. Again you know that just that seductive very simple two-note bounce with all this other insanity going on Again, this is again that really expansive, celebratory kind of intergalactic carnival kind of sound with this high pace and high energy. It's really like you know this is celebration of existence in a kind of cosmos that's beyond our understanding. It's beyond our understanding. What is going on there? I mean, and now it just breaks through, and you're just in this clear, open, other dimension. With that very funky rhythm as well. A little Bit of the pattern changing there with the timing, how that bounce is presented.

And the effect of this on the dance floor is just... And the effect in here as well. Pretty wild. I mean, you know this—the way the riffs again are presented, you know, over time, and the way things come back, and you know, with all of this abstract stuff, you just completely lose yourself, and you know, you're constantly attempting to relocate yourself in time and space. Has no idea how long this has been going on for. Bit of a cosmic joke, there, really. The cosmic joke there, really. Ooh, a little development there. Bouncing up higher. Now things are going to start unwinding. Ends with an interesting note. Chopped up gating effect. Right, and that's not is not on the main key, right? That note, so it sort of leaves you hanging there in sort of suspended disbelief, which is pretty much the state that you're in for that entire trial. What? What is that? I mean, this is a whole other realm, a whole other kind of music, right?

So, you know, when people talk about what Goa music is, it's kind of hard to say, right? Because there's a lot of people who think it's, you know, the stuff with, you know, Phrygian or whatever other kind of modes there are, you know, just off of the major and minor. And I've talked, you know, primarily in major minor terms, simply because those are, you know, those two standards. But you know, these other Scales that start on different notes, you know, and the way you work that on a keyboard is if you just played the white notes, right? You start on C, there's a major. You start on A, it's a minor. And then there's these other scales and these, you know, these different harmonies that are not traditionally used in the Western cultures, but they are in others.

And this is just like it's nothing to do with their culture or planet. I mean, it's just completely off of the tonal Scale and working with pitch, simulating notes that is just on the edge, and so there's that sort of like sandpapery sort of you know semi-abrasive quality, and it just really helps you to step outside of the standard framework of you know the musical consciousness that tends to run our planet, and really different, right? And so your consciousness is really sort of stepping outside of you know the parameters that normally you know run the show in terms of the mainstream. And so you know when we talk about Goa music, you know there's the stuff that is beautiful and that is melodic and that has you know elements of major and minor and elements that are common to what we hear on our planet Normally, and then we have this, right? It's just completely from another dimension.

And yet, of course, there's the elements, right? There's the four on the floor. There's the rhythmic stuff. There's all of these sounds. You know, we do have tonal sounds, and we have that beautiful bounce, you know, just between those different notes happening, which creates that upbeat bubbling. Is part of actually contributes to the upbeat bubbling quality of this of this track, as does a lot of other stuff that's bubbling and going up. So really uplifting, a completely otherworldly and introspective track, an absolute masterpiece by three genius musicians, Frankie Medson, Ian Ayon, and Graham Wood. Hats off and heads off, gentlemen, because holy moly, that is just a total mind blower.

So there we go. I am going to wrap up now this episode so that you can listen to the track without any commentary over it and go through whatever intergalactic journey it takes you on. I'm Mark DJ Solitaire, wrapping up episode 108 of Retrogoa Explorations and leaving you now with the masterpiece by Psychopoda with a guest appearance by the intrepid Graham Wood Friagram. Intrepid Graham Wood fryogram.
