Artist: Koxbox
Song: Life Is A Gas (X-Dream Remix)
Year: 1997

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 109 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So today's track is really quite a number, and it Pulled quite a number on me, really. It was one of the most twisted, out there, really otherworldly, boundary-defying, consciousness-shredding at times productions that I heard at that time and pretty much ever.

And it's a little bit of a mathematical equation today because In episode 107, we featured X-Dream. In 108, there was Psychopod, and today in 109 is a combination because this is X-Dream's remix of the Koxbox track "Life Is," and it became titled "Life Is A Gas," which has all kinds of possible connotations. The original meaning of which life is something's a gas. It means it's a it's a lot of fun.

It's a blast, and so on, which is a good optimistic attitude to look at things with. Not that this track is necessarily optimistic per se. It is really out there. I remember when I got this one.

It was November 1997. So this is the trip where Richard Purple and I went to London from London to Tokyo for three days. I stayed on for an extra two weeks and bought a really expensive one-way return. And I remember one day I went into the Cisco CD and LP shop in in Shibuya, which was really the you know The techno trance outfit Cisco had a bunch of different ones, different shops for different musical styles, and this is where everybody went.

And looking around new CDs, I was there with a friend who I used to work with when I on my previous stint in Japan, worked as an English teacher, and we were just you know looking around. I'd invited him to a party or two before he loved it, And saw this gorgeous, gorgeous cover, and just saw that, and you know, my buddy said, "Oh, let me buy that for you. That'll be fun." So it certainly is. Now, so the CD single has the original track, then it has the X-Dream remix as well, and it also has the incredible track by Koxbox, "Stay Psychedelic, which I'm not sure if it was issued on vinyl, because I think you know maybe it was on the other side of the remix, but I'm not sure.

In any case, didn't bother to check it out before filming, but I remember that is also a great favorite of mine. This one, however, very different atmosphere, incredibly dark, incredibly twisted. It's got all of the brilliance of Psychopod, you know, Psychopod and Koxbox. This is on Blue Room, so it's released as Koxbox, with their incredible boundary-defying, harmonic, quirky weirdness, with X-Dream's, unbelievable engineering, the drive, that chug-a-chug-a quality, and creative storytelling as well in both outfits, just unbelievable with their storytelling.

This is really, this is really something else. There's a number of interesting aspects to it. One of which is the the sort of the pitch bending, and the fact that it doesn't quite seem quite centered on the on the key on the tonality. So It just really has this.

There's this real melting quality, which you know, on the dance floor, dropped at the right time in the story, it's really like all of these familiar structures just kind of start melting. So, so I think it's probably time to give it a listen. There's this track was it. It really had such a profound influence On you know my experience of it and my experience of life afterwards.

I mean, we'll talk about life as a gas. And there was something today actually just prior to filming that ties in with this, but I'm going to tell the story afterwards. So I think it'll make a little more sense once we hear the music. So let's give this a listen: The X-Dream remix of the track "Life Is" by Koxbox.

Life Is A Gas. So it starts off with this these weird otherworldly sounds, which also sound like voices. Now this Morse code-like rhythm starts coming in. We hear A little bit on sounds like on two different frequencies there.

So you know if we think about what extreme was producing at the time, right, with Telegram coming up a little bit later, probably produced around this time. I notice that that nonstop rhythm and the kick comes in in a surprising way. Just notice how the rhythm is going to change when that happens. so the um the beat emphasis of that pattern changes when the kick comes in which is very cool notice that those upper sounds for the percussion so crisp the layering i mean this This extreme engineering is just unbelievable, still incredible.

It's just unbelievable. Still, incredible. Slide. Stop.

All the textures and sounds, and the way everything communicates. Then There's a diminished fifth in there, and the slide is very sensual, but also eerie. All of those other sounds coming in, completely twisted alien voice there and then. So Kind of like this dialogue going on, or even a group chat.

That also that insistent voice has now come to the foreground. Just throw this in the middle of everything, and then Just you don't know what hit you if you hear this for the first time. Very atonal here. Really, so this is off of the standard kind of harmonization that we'll normally hear in Western music.

And then, then sometime soon, can can never tell how long everything's gonna last here. Okay, so there's two bits going here, and then there's that lower one, right? Right, so one's more staccato, one's got this real twang. Then we're getting again that more of that otherworldly, sort of you know where Koxbox and Psychopod were at this time in their creative journey.

Then. and this climbing right so it's really it's uplifting right in terms of the the direction and the shaping and the rhythm of it but while it's just unbelievably twisted At the same time, really fascinating combo. And now here, more incredible pitch bending with this sort of chopped up bit. Which in classical music, there's a lot of orchestral works where violins Lens will do this kind of back and forth stuff.

It's just like this, and really just melting. And this is almost inquisitive. And this almost inquisitive, existential kind of questioning going on here. And then, I mean, really, this is just like this incredible transmission and weird, engaged Conversation with this group of beings who speak a musical, semi-musical language.

Different instrumentation there. Doubled up. Doubled up. Great, pulling out the percussion.

That rhythm. And notice the bassline here. Drops down. Those bleepy noises.

And this really sounds absolutely like this is coming from another planet. Then you're back here in this particular zone. Extra voice thrown in there with extra atonal quality. Then here we've again, there's the pitch sliding.

How many voices? There's a lot of lifting quality to this, and then that cool sound that comes forward as it starts to wrap up. Notice that tone. Notice that tone, then it goes down to the tonic to the main note of the key.

I mean, there was really nothing I'd heard like that. Friagram, which we had last week, I mean, that was pretty. Nothing I'd heard like that. Friagram, which we had last week, man, that was pretty messed up.

This is this is just next level, right? They take that atonal alien voice stuff to a whole other level, and then X-Dream does, you know, has their way with it, with the incredible percussive elements, all the creative sounds, the different textures of the different voices, both the harmonic and non-harmonic, and all of that pitch bending and everything—it was just wild. And also those voices, I mean, tons of voices in the melodic shaping, as well as in the sort of again the non-melodic, that this sort of just really weirdly textured stuff. So you know, I got that CD Single then, thanks to Ken.

Thanks Ken. In November '97, obviously started playing it right away. And I remember then in Vancouver when it was passing through before Tokyo. And as I mentioned, Solstice had their Sayonara party in Vancouver, and Chika was playing.

That was the set when he played off my DAT of you know The Delta track, and I remember him playing this one. And it was a Friday the Thirteenth full moon kind of situation in a basement, and it was just a complete psychedelic mashup, and it was a perfect track for it. So yeah, it's just a really a whole other whole other story. This one.

So before I was filming, I was going to the standard computer that I normally used to film, and the microphone was Glitching, so I tried another cable for it, and it recorded. Sometimes it would record okay, and then sometimes it would sound like the voices in that track. And so then I just tried, okay, let's just plug in the other microphone that I have, which I normally use for my laptop, same brand, same kind of thing, and started working, and then started devolving Into those these weird voices, so here I am. I decided, well, you know, I knew I was going to upgrade and start recording on this computer as well soon, and so I guess now it's you know this track is forced in my hand.

But it was just that way that you know the music and these experiences would bleed into your reality. Like it was around this time that I was really starting to experience that. Like there was messages in the music, and then I would have These reverberations through my life, and you know, coming out of the events as well, and just got to experience that again today. It was really touching in with sort of you know how this track impacted me back then, and the fact that it really was like sort of ripping apart this veil that separates us from another aspect of reality, and it just Really seem to hit on that level, and then my microphones decided to say hello.

And it obviously wasn't a microphone. I guess it's my old hard drive or my old main my old mainframe that needed revisiting. So, so there we go. It was just another kind of fun experience with this track to sort of add to my you know I don't know how many years we're at now, 27, 28 years with this track.

Real beauty. I will sign off here and let you hear the complete, glorious masterpiece on its own without any of my commentary. I'm Mark DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode 109 and leaving you now with a wonderful X-Dream remix of the Koxbox track.
