Artist: Hallucinogen
Song: Magik
Year: 1998

Hey, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 111 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement.

And so we are in the 97 to 98 season, so roughly from the autumn of '97 through to the end of the summer of '98, I was living in London through till February '98. Went back to Vancouver for three weeks and then ended up in Tokyo. So this covers, you know, me in three areas and a whole incredible slew of music by artists we were familiar with, new artists, and really the evolution of this music. I was really getting very, very into it, as if I wasn't already. As I started performing in Tokyo as of May '98, and always on the hunt for new music. It used to be so exciting going into the shops and seeing what was released and you know what came out. So I think everybody made their pilgrimages at least once a week, if not more.

And this particular one, I believe, when I looked online, it came out June or July, but I think June 1998. So I'm not going to be chronological with you know through each season. I'm sort of going to pick and choose and vary the artists a little bit because there's a whole bunch of different ones that I want to feature. Some of which involve you know collaborations or multiple tracks by the same artist. But this one, I really wanted to share today. It's a real favorite, and it is on this TIP Beyond Colour compilation.

So you know, TIP was doing all of their amazing compilations, you know, with a different color for each one. Sometimes I thought that the they named it after the color, the other color than it should have been, since there were always two of them, and that that's another story. But this one they ended up with beyond color, which is kind of cool.

And I've talked before, I mean, started in quite early on talking about in this series the fact that quite often artists would release their tracks on labels that weren't the main Ones that they were signed to, right? And how, for example, The Infinity Project had their TIP label already when they released the incredible Psycho Tools EP of Binary Neurodot and Telepathy on Spirit Zone. And so, even in '98, when Twisted Records was around, it started in the autumn of '96. That was at least their first release . There's still a Hallucinogen track on this compilation. Magik, spelled with a K at the end, good old-fashioned mystical style of spelling it.

And what can I say? Right, it's a Hallucinogen track, and everybody's like, ah, a new Hallucinogen track. So of course we were all excited, and you know something that I always enjoyed was listening to, you know, paying attention to the titles and listening to the samples and listening to the message and paying attention to, you know, what's going on in the overall zeitgeist of the planet and of of the evolution of the music. And so you know that was another piece that I was listening to, not just sort of how you know the sounds and Harmonies, you know what's kind of continuing and what's familiar from previous tracks, and then where are things happening in a different way? Where's the where's the sound and the structures and so on evolving? And you know everybody was always excited when there was a new Hallucinogen track, and I think they still would be. And that was the case with this one.

Absolutely beautiful track. There's a few very interesting things to pay attention to with the rhythm, as usual. You know the Hallucinogen style. I mean, there's styles. There's different periods of his music, but you know you can always tell that it's Maestro Simon Foster, who is at the controls. And there are some always some distinctive elements, but there's always something completely different.

One of the things that really stands out is the bassline. The fact that back then the bassline was always different, so there's no concept at all that an artist was going to have just one baseline or that others would have the same baseline. And that was part of the dare I say magic of the music of this time. It was always something different, and so you would be put in a different mood, and you would go through a whole other experience with each track because the foundation was different, and so that helped you reach different places in your consciousness and have a different experience and go through different emotions and moods as you were having your dance experience and your inner experience with that.

And so, what I love about this one is the accenting. There's the main bassline that has an accent on the first beat and the fourth beat, which is cool. And then there's another figuration that sort of lands on the second beat. So you always have this rich rhythmic tapestry that's going on. While there's the whole, you know, sonic framework that Simon was weaving in a way that nobody else could.

And you know, brand new effects. And every time he we got a new piece of equipment. You know, there was all kinds of experimentation going on, but also some of the familiar, classic, tried and true bits that just always work. They always push our buttons.

So I think that's it. I'll just note: Raja Ram has a writing credit on here. Not sure what he did on this particular one, but you know, quite often people would end up in the studio, maybe just say, you know, point something out, this or that, or something like that. And you know, they were well into Shpongle time at this point. The album had not yet come out, but the album was complete. I did have promos of it around this time or soon afterwards. I wrote the press release for that one and have done for all of them since. And you know, we'll be covering when that one at some point. We'll be covering, you know, probably one track from that, even though it's you know not necessarily floor on the floor, but some major stuff there. But in any case, you know, Raj and Simon were doing a lot of collaboration at this point, so of course it makes sense that he might have been there.

And I think that's it. I'll be pointing out a sample, one particular sample that's identified. So, okay, let's get started here with the 1998 classic by Hallucinogen Magik.

A movie. Something taken from a TV show or a movie. Notice that one, two, and three, four. Wonderful bounce, right? Even when the tracks get weird and twisted, there's this delightful bounce. And we get that very cool effect. That was just completely brand new, Cutting edge, and we'd never heard anything like that before that time.

And then, then maybe not. Maybe that's coming on the next round. It's always the exciting bit with his music—sort of never know when something's going to drop in. There we go.

So now we get like a little bit at a time when there was less of that Eastern influence in Goa music. That term was being used a lot less. We still get it's beautiful, beautiful melody with that kind of sound. Notice the momentum, great voice, the momentum with the rhythm of that bassline.

Now we get also all these other voices, and this is sort of you know where we started hearing in Simon some more abstract music that would be coming after this, and then his unbelievable echo effects, cool little sounds of like voices here and there, and then that that classic gating, that sort of chopped up effect. Just the textures, everything is just so transparent, beautifully clear.

Very cool how the percussive element really almost becomes melodic just because of the the way it's shaped. Notice that pattern is communicating, and again that call and answer going up, coming down. So no overt melody here.

Then that bassline continues. And then, that bassline continues. Just wild, crazy voices. This is some kind of cool futuristic sample while we get this other voice starting to come in. That's where the title comes from, obviously.

And here we get the accenting that varies from the from the baseline, so it is a wonderful complement. Compliment. And all these implied voices here as well. Something we'll have heard with Beast prior to this. That one's coming.

Incredible little section here. Very creative use of great little sample coming up. 1950s movie or Raja Ram? You decide. I love those laser zap punctuations, a little bit of a sort of granular quality to them, a little dissonance there.

So listen to all the different rhythmic points that are being hit as well as on the tonal spectrum. Beautiful gating there. There's that higher one in the background, while there's that more guttural, little voice going on.

Now there's this very cool little evolution that starts happening harmonically here. That other little voice coming in, circular effect.

Then we're gonna get Riktam from GMS is gonna be coming in. It's a message that Riktam left. This is a message that Riktam left on Simon's voicemail. Where are you?

And this kind of figuration that we would hear a few times later on in *Lucid Dream* and I believe *Spandau*. This beautiful fluttering effect. Again. Again, all of the voices always play along well with one another.

Just amazing. It's all building up so that it can start to unwind shortly. It's again Riktam, together with the TV sample. Now it's just really percussive. Beautiful echoes. Gorgeous. I mean, really.

Um, I still remember, you know, I don't remember exactly when I got this. Got this at the wave shop in Tokyo. There was one in Roppongi and one in Shibuya. I'm not sure which one, but I just remember any time a CD showed up, it's a losing a gem. Yoink! Of course, you're gonna buy it right away.

It's just, you know, it was like, okay, we're we've pushed the envelope a little bit, and you know, it was like that with our favorite artists. And this was a time when you know things were starting to get a little bit away from some of the melodic stuff that we, those of us who started, you know, getting into this music a few years earlier, were really in love with. And I mean, we've already explored some of that the other stuff, and it's fantastic. I mean, there was lots of great stuff, but you know, we were some of us were still yearning for some of this, you know, the Beautiful harmonies and melodies, and so on. You know, as always, Maestro Posford delivered.

So that was great. The track has now been released and remastered on this beauty. That contains more hits, and I was very happy to. Was very happy to help with a couple of trivia notes on there as well, and the text inside from yours truly and beautifully remastered. It's also on the remastered version. Is on the the two. Remastered. It's also on the remastered version is on the the Twisted YouTube channel. I've used the old one from this one just to keep things sufficiently retro. But I'll link their YouTube to it as well, and the text written by me as well with some of these trivia points.

But really happy to feature this track in this series because again, I just remember you know at a time when I was doing, started doing the writing for Twisted at this point, you know, all of their press releases. So I was hearing, you know, before release stuff that Simon was putting out. But this one was one. I was like, Hey, wait a second, I know that one because it came out on TIP. And ain't it wonderful? So I'll sign off here and leave you with the complete track without any commentary.
