Artist: Infernal Machine
Song: Loin King (Man With No Name Remix)
Year: 1997

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 112 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are currently exploring tracks from the '97 to '98 season, so from the autumn of '97 through to the end of summer '98, I should say, and what a time it was! It was my last few months in London, you know, starting from roughly—I mean, I was there September '96, but from autumn of '97 through to about, I think it was third week of February '98, before I moved To Tokyo after a visit to Canada in March '98. There's going to be lots to say about that particular period in Japan, as well as a lot of the tracks that I came across then. But this is one that came to me in London, and it's got quite a little backstory to it. Not huge and expansive like some of them, like that Delta track, but an interesting one.

Now, this is actually a remix, and it's a remix by one of the all-time favorite producers of a track by one of the all-time favorite producers in the scene. So it's a pretty interesting one, and I fortunately was able to get my hands on this little baby before its release and in time to feature it at the only party that I played at in London that was like an official kind of party that had you know a flyer, black and white, photocopy style, very old school, and you know in a cover charge and all of that sort of stuff. And I played the closing set and I closed with this track, which only a couple of people had at the time, and it was quite a little coup to be able to get my hands on it. Now it only ended up coming out in May '98 on this magnificent CD, Dementertainment, which I had promos of prior to the release. That was doing some distribution in Japan to some folks there. And track number four here is "Loin King by Infernal Machine, remixed by Man With No Name.

Now, just to clarify, Infernal Machine is a project that produced three tracks with Simon Posford and Dick Trevor. However, this particular one, Loin King, was written by Simon alone. The label Confirms it. He produced it under a different track title as well for the return to the source in New York party. Didn't end up playing it. Tsuyoshi Suzuki premiered it. He ended up ending that whole event with that track. I have a photo of that happening in my coverage of that particular track.

So this one I first heard in Tyson Street, the place where they had most of the parties in London. Most of the trance parties that I went to were there. It was an absolutely dismal venue that lots of people still speak of about, you know, the amazing vibe. I don't know. Certainly wasn't Japan. It was a bit of a dive, and but in any case, there were Definitely, I mean, I heard some great artists there, and on had to research this because for some reason, as much as I got, you know, tons of flyers from Tokyo, I don't know what happened to the ones from London. So, but I did a little digging and found a review that I wrote of the event that I seem to remember hearing it at, and that was on December twenty seventh, ninety seven, when Sidonia played at Tyson Street, they gave a live and they were premiering their album, which had not been released yet. And Dino also played a DJ set. Dino Psaras, if y'all don't know, is a phenomenal DJ. I mean, he is just whole other level, Mixing the levels, I've never heard anybody have such seamless level. I I don't know how he does it. I've stood there and watched him more recently, and I still don't know how he manages. You know, listening, I can't do it. He's a master, and I remember hearing.

Now, originally, my memory was that I thought I heard Man With No Name play at Tyson Street. I actually now don't think I did, and I remember that I was standing at the same spot in Tyson. No, don't think I did. And I remember that I was standing at the same spot in Tyson Street, and my visual memory is more aligned with when Dino played his DJ set after after the you know Sidonia Alive. And so, again, December twenty-seventh, ninety seven is kind of cool that we had you know a day after Boxing Day party. And I remember hearing the opening strains from Loin King come in, and I was like, "Oh, wait a second, this is different, right?" So he was mixing it in, and then the track comes in. I was like, "Oh my God, this is a remix! What the heck?"

And so I don't know when I would have ended up going to Twisted HQ, but I did. I would drop by at least once a month or so, and I mentioned it to Simon Holtom, who's the manager there, and he, I had a DJ set coming up at that party that he played, which again I thought was December, must have been January, unless it was like a few days after this. And again, how do I not have a flyer for the only party that I played at in London? But in any case, he let me copy this, and I only had my MiniDisc player. I didn't go over specifically to copy any music, and I was listening, you know, on my mini disc player on the subways of London or the underground. And speaking of underground, and so I asked him if I could have this track, and he said yes. And this is the time when he also offered me the Radiohead remix, and I didn't take it because I hated the original. Now I really regret it, of course, because I think that remix is amazing, and nobody had it at the time, really. So I did get this amazing track and closed my set with it, and it was a real favorite, and it has been of all time.

How it came to be made? Again, details are a little bit fuzzy, but by this point, Man With No Name was signed To Perfecto, right with the label that was run by Paul Oakenfold. Paul Oakenfold had a major impact on the scene, getting more publicity. He was a very popular DJ. He got bitten by the goa bug sometime in ninety three, ninety four. He wrote the booklet notes very evocatively and obviously very moved in for the first Concept and Dance CD. And he founded his own Perfecto label, and he was still a very popular DJ. And so, Man With No Name got signed there. It was a very exclusive contract, but it seems like remixes of other artists' work were doable. Now they still did release the Infinity Project's Stimuli, the original, and also the remix that Man With No Name did for that track, which is another one that I absolutely adore.

But Martin was visiting the Twisted Office someday, and I guess they were listening to some music. And Simon thinks he probably asked. This is Simon Holtom, the manager. Again, you know, details are a little fuzzy, but he thinks he probably asked for a track because he was putting together this compilation. It's like I can't, I can't, but I can do a remix. And I guess somehow, maybe they listened to this track or whatever, whatever it is that happened. The remix happened. Martin checked in with Paul Oakenfold, who called up the Twisted office and said, "Can you get me a test pressing of that? I want to play it." So it was able, it was sanctioned for release on Twisted, and you know, Paul Okunfold joyfully, I'm sure, played this incredible track.

And as I've named before, you know, Man With No Name has broad appeal. There's all these great elements. There's elements that you're going to hear in clubier music, but it's not just cluby music. And he goes much deeper than that. And in this one, he certainly does. I think this is an absolutely incredible track. I think his treatment of it is great. It's a very different character, in a way, because the original has, you know, it's got a deeper, I think, tonal palette. It's got more oomph in that sense, and this one's got a really upbeat and sort of an upper, upper frequency signature, I think, and some different treatment with the beautiful percussive elements in the higher sort of the higher frequencies. Absolutely gorgeous track, and I'm delighted that it was allowed to come out on this amazing compilation. I really think this is one of the all-time great, great, great compilations.

I also remember Dino playing them the Beast track “Spawn” from this one. I remember how he mixed it. I remember he just did that slide, and then how that happened. I was, whoa! How did he do that? We're not worthy. Thank you, Dino. But in any case, and of course, as I said, I think last week that beast track will be covered one of these days soon. But enough digressions, enough storytelling. I think it's time for us to listen to this absolutely amazing track, the remix by Man With No Name of Loin King by Infernal Machine.

In this case, though, Simon Posford only. So here we have the familiar sort of note, and then the signature that's really key for this track, very distinctive. It's like they call an answer, and then hear what I mean. In terms of like percussive elements, and again, this is a little bit like what I was talking about last time in Hallucinogens Magic, the way the percussive elements start becoming voice-like, and it sounds like they're all in communication with one another. Another. Then, pay attention to that bass line. It goes up and down. And listen to this sheet-like folding that seems to be going on in those upper frequencies. And the hi-hats. Beautiful intro Beautiful introduction. Whoa, didn't see that one coming. Beautiful bleepy, kind of really wild kind of shift of gears. And again, the note down and up. Beautiful Voice there. You know, it doesn't always have to be complicated. You know, those single notes, when they're well placed, they really tell us a story. And then, this is just part of the key riff, part of the development. Beautiful treatment of that particular line from the original.

Now it's interesting because it seems like it's building up really, really quickly here. But again, the storyline is really beautifully laid out with appropriate breaks along the way. Then That comes back. So all of this then has something to partner with. It just really clears the palette where we just have these two key elements going on. And again, what I love is this is, you know, part of the larger riff that's just, it sounds complete on its own. Right, and so again, it hasn't built up too much. Right, we had that real, almost seemed like, wow, we're at the climax, and then things mellowed out. We got these cool little bits happening, and we're gonna build up as we already did with some different stuff behind us and this is beautiful here a little bit more atmospheric and that beautiful riff, you know, which is one of the first things we heard in this track. It just comes in, comes and goes as it pleases, and then we get back to that high power.

So now this beautiful break here is going to start building up to the real climax with that gorgeous four-note riff, and we get those wonderful bleeps to break through to the next level and just such a simple, beautiful riff, and you know that ascending pattern combined with the beauty, you know the singable melody, and so on. It just really, really lifts things up. Notice how the voicing is different here. Sleek. It's really elegant and then it's just calming down, and that one comes down as well, and you're left with that rhythmic element. Ain't that a beauty? I mean, really, absolutely magnificent track.

Uh, Man With No Name, Martin Freeland remixing Simon Posford's Loin King, issued as an Infernal Machine track. Um, I mean, so much going on. Not the longest track, right, I think about six and a half minutes. Packs a punch, and yet it it's not sort of that deeper sonic framework that we've got in the original, right? It's that's got you know a lot more whoosh and a lot more driving bass, and so on. But this is what's so fascinating: how each producer had their signature sounds, right? Not just one sound necessarily, right? They had like a few different styles that they could compose in and different sonic palettes, because of course they had different studios with different equipment. They weren't all using the same plugins on their, you know, same brand computer. So, just they learned how to create with what it is that they had, and they had their own musical vision and inclinations. Inclinations in any case, and so we got really different sounds.

And so hearing you know Martin Freeland's treatment of this, what I think is an all time classic by Simon Posford, it's really fascinating. Absolutely love this track. Very fond memories for me since it's just on the tail end of my visit to London. It was an opportunity for me, you know, one of the few you know really unreleased tracks that I had in my collection at the time that it was able to play in that sole set of mine, just prior to my departure from London, and part of what I think again is really one of the all-time great compilations. So I think that is it for now. I am going to sign off here, Mark DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode 112, and leaving you now with a complete, without commentary, Loin King remix by Man With No Name.
