Artist: Fools And Tools
Song: Hundreds Of Sunsets
Year: 1997

Hey, there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 114 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are in the '97 to '98 season, so the autumn of '97 through to the summer of ninety-eight, a time when there were new projects that were coming out, when established artists were shifting their styles or producing more, and it was a really exciting time. And it covers the last few months of my time in the UK and a little transition period in Canada before moving back to Japan. And this track actually really bridges kind of the span of my London to Canada to Japan time.

It is one that I first encountered possibly in the summer, but I think in the autumn of 1997, which I got a test pressing of when I was leaving London in February '98. One side of which I played in Canada on March 15th, 1998, from said white label, and which was released on vinyl only in May '98. Now, the vinyl mix is different from what came out on CD, and the CD version of this track was issued on Dementertainment. Fools And Tools, Hundreds Of Sunsets, Fools and Tools being a short-lived collaborative project between Ben Wierzoch of Planet B.E.N. and Marcus Maichel from X-Dream.

And so the story behind the four tracks, two mixes of two tracks, is a pretty fascinating one. And I have it's definitely my first encounter is among the most profound memories that I have in my trance experience in London. As I named, I used to regularly swing by the Twisted office. The first time I went by there was January '97 when it was on my way to Paris to see Tsuyoshi Suzuki. That was the first time I had met Simon Holtom, who is manager of the label. I was friends with Hector, DJ Toast, who was working at the label, and so I went by to see them to see Hector first and to meet Simon.

And so then I used to regularly drop by, sometimes see Hector, sometimes just Simon, and I walked in one time, and I'm pretty sure it was either the very end of the summer or early autumn in '97. And Simon says to me, "I just got this tape, and you should listen to it." And he puts on this tape, and we're sort of, you know, puts the sound system was on one wall. It was a pretty long room with two desks on the side, and we stood in the middle of the room, and he puts on the DAT, and I stood there. I'm pretty sure we both stood there for the four tracks while the entire thing played, and I simply couldn't move.

So there were two mixes of Hundreds Of Sunsets, and two mixes of Itchy And Scratchy. Now, so itchy and scratchy, those two mixes are radically different from one another. In Hundreds of Sunsets, which is the track we'll feature today, I might do a later episode on itchy and scratchy, just because again those differences are so stark. But but the differences between Hundreds of Sunsets simply has to do with the removal of one key riff, and I prefer the one that has the riff, and that is the one that made it onto vinyl, and not on this CD. Although it was released on some German compilations, so the vinyl mixes would often sort of sometimes end up on these Goa-Head or Planet Goa or whatever. Those sort of those fantastic German compilations that put out by Nova Tekk, if I'm remembering correctly, might be wrong.

But in any case, so the version that I prefer didn't end up primarily on digital with Twisted, but I did have that test-pressing/white-label copy. Now the history with this project and these tracks actually goes a little further back, because it was originally intended to be released, or there were plans to release it on Blue Room, and just a few copies of a white label were already pressed, and one of my buddies, DJ Ukido, has one of those few copies. The photos of which you can see here, but for whatever reason, it ended up going to Twisted.

Now they had a different version of itchy and scratchy than the one that would come out, and it's a fantastic one. I've played that several times. It's a long story, and again, I'll probably get into that in this in the other video. But Simon Holtom told me more recently when I checked, he said basically that he got the DAT with the four tracks, but that the artists chose this particular mix of Itchy And Scratchy. So they presented it to him as a single with these particular ones already selected, and so that's what ended up being released. And I think they're both great.

Now, Hundreds of Sunsets is a particularly evocative one. It has a beautiful sample from an astronaut who is talking about how, being in space, they had the opportu opportunity to see Hundreds of Sunsets on the horizons of our planet, because of course their relationship with location to the planet and the sun in space was was different. So absolutely beautiful sample and a really mystical, evocative, gorgeous, spacious track. And I really think also the upper elements that come in, which are not on the CD mix on Digital And entertainment, I think they add a lot of warmth and also a lot of, I mean, a lot of wonderful atmosphere. So, a great thing to have when you're in outer space. So, I'll point those out when they come in.

But I think, other than that, I don't think there's much preamble. I mean, it's quite an interesting little story in terms of the fact that you know, it almost came out on one label, ended up coming out in another different blend of those, and I mean they're all just fantastic, and I still just remember being completely awestruck, jaw dropped, standing there in the middle of that room listening to these productions in you know massive speakers and thinking what the heck am I listening to? And this track still does it for me. So here we go, tools and tools, aka that Hundreds of Sunsets.

Very neat little slide down there into the track, and then it's going to be that mantra-like repetition. Sounds like a voice, or really this kind of pulsing coming from outer space or from the planet. Super. Super electronic, bleepy stuff. It really, I mean, it just sounds like quantum noises in outer space. Really evocative. Not kidding. That kick, rumbling kick, really again very deep. It's like the pulsing of the planet. What a sample! That is a really low frequency. It plays at a really low frequency, this, and now it starts to build into the upper frequencies. Notice the rhythm, and then that kick coming up. Really hypnotic rhythm. Wait a second. Just in so many of these great tracks, right? How all the different frequencies that are happening on all these different levels, the clarity of the production, the syncopated rhythm there, the way it lands and pauses.

Right, so so far. All right, so so far it's fairly abstract, right? There's no singable tune yet, right? Alright, so very much just like outer space travel. We get that extra voice added in, and you know, one of those kinds of Morse code-like messages being transmitted, with its own rhythmic sort of impulse, and then that again—that long sweep I was coming through. Sample. Transition coming up here. This is the voice that I just find is absolutely hypnotic and mesmerizing. It really sounds, it's describing sunsets, but it also has this real sunrise kind of atmosphere. Both up. Kind of atmosphere, both uplifting and mysterious and calm and evocative.

Sort of feel the tension slightly building up in the background. And just listen how you know even when there's multiple things happening on upper frequencies, how beautifully they play together, and just how the whole range, the whole frequency range is so beautifully spread out. And this beautiful gated voice. And beautiful, evocative, hypnotic. I love the way they kick, it sort of comes out a little bit when we have these beautiful pauses, but there's still that rumbling. That non-stop mantra, right, it really is just like, again, it's sort of pulsar coming coming from outer space, like an electromagnetic storm. It's like an electromagnetic storm with all these other sounds as well. Stop climbing up there. I'm completely zoning out here as well, listening to it in all of these details.

Now, this other voice, this is showing up for the first time. Right, so it's all really starting to build towards towards a peak before it fades out. And this gorgeous, beautiful note progression with this voice going up just that little bit. Going up again before it comes down. That voice has stopped now, you can sort of feel things starting to settle down, slowly, bit by bit. And that voice comes in again. Notice the rhythmic balance between these. You can really feel them. It's really textured. One note. It goes. It's gonna end with just one final pulse. Final pulse.

I mean, wow! Really, that is just one of the most, for me, beautiful, spacious, magical, mystical, evocative, you know, really space-infused tracks that I've heard. And Certainly, standing there in the office in '97, listening to it on a really big speaker system, and you know, while this was you know this was brand new, I remember just thinking, "What is going on? Where is this music going? And where could it continue to go? And if only it would continue to go in the directions that this was pointing at." I mean, it has in some respects, but last twenty years hasn't exactly been on this level. It's exalted plane, as it.

Really, absolutely magical that the full or the main vinyl mix of Hundreds Of Sunsets, as opposed to the mono mix, which is lacking some of those harmonic voices in the middle. Just absolutely magical. Really, a yeah, just uh. Really a yeah, just it gets me every time. I haven't heard many other people play it. I remember playing it at it was sunset at a sort of underground party in Tokyo in the park in Yoyogi Park, and the sun was setting through the trees. And I remember playing this, and it was really yeah, very atmospheric. Just a gorgeous, gorgeous track.

So, so that's it. I am going to sign off here and leave you with the complete track without any commentary.
