Artist: Juno Reactor
Song: Komit
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 117 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are in the 97-98 season, so roughly from music from the Autumn of '97 through to the end of the summer '98, and the track from this album, and in fact the whole album, was apparently released in the summer of '97. I don't remember getting it then. I actually have no memory of when I got it, which is kind of amazing because y'all know my memory.

And this is also one of the just one of the all time great things. It's a track from one of the all time great albums. It was almost impossible to choose which track to feature, and I am probably going to have to do a feature on the whole album. I might have to start doing that in a few cases because this is just a whole other dimension.

So apparently, this was released in June or July '97. I don't remember it from that time period. When I do remember it, is in the spring of '98, soon after I moved to Japan, and I was hanging out with the guys from the Solstice Crew who had also just moved from Vancouver back to Japan the same weekend that I did. And we would often hang out. And I remember one Night, we went to the park, and I remember we're driving through the city, very futuristic sort of, you know, setting of Tokyo, very urban landscape, and listening to this in the car, and I was just like, "Whoa, this is just like out of a movie. This is just, you know, like this futuristic movie." And it was "Libel Dreams" from Juno Reactor, which you know, it stuns me that this was out in '97. It stuns me that it still sounds so far ahead of anything else that's been written since. It really blows my mind.

And in fact, I have a little story about that. You know, me and my stories. In 2003, I was in the cinema and Watching the second Matrix movie, and I start hearing this bassline creep in, and I was like, "No way!" And it's the bassline from Comet. And somebody was asking where Neo was, and the answer was, "He's doing a Superman thing." And then he zips through, and then there's a little section, an abbreviated section of the Main riffs and everything from Comet, and I just about jumped out of my seat, saying, "This! I know this! This is from 2000! This is from so many years before! It was from six years before, and it still sounded futuristic in 2003, and I think it still does. And this is how far ahead I think we all feel, listening to this music, and you listen to sort of what's happening in EDM land and everything like this, and it's like we were listening to much more advanced music than this 30 years ago.

The Juno Reactor has always been way ahead of the curve in terms of storyline, in terms of us, you know, stylistically, production, and this one production level is a whole other level from what they were doing previously. And Ben told me that you know between beyond the Infinite and Bible of Dreams, he got a new mixing desk that really helped them to take things up. Was more than a notch, really. I would say it was. It was really something. There's just a level of transparency and clarity that's I don't think has been equaled. And it's also the sounds that they use. The sounds are. I mean, I think it'll be better when you know if I go into that when I listen, but they're so evocative. There's such there's lightness and clarity. There's there's just sounds that you don't hear anybody else using.

Now, when it comes to, I just reached out to Ben to ask about this because, and you know, really, I think we're going to need to explore the whole album because this is just amazing, but Comet is among my favorite tracks. I mean, the whole thing is incredible. And I asked him, you know, was there any meaning behind it? I figured there would be, and sure enough, Ben said it came from a dream I had where I saw a heavenly body floating in the sky, and flower petals raining down upon the earth, in a tight view of the planets circling A goddess being, and a comet was circling all of the planetary objects. So even though this is spelled comet, K O M I T, this where there was a comet, C O M E T, that was circling around.

Now comet, there are some in the Indian language. As one of the Indian languages, I think it's in Hindi. It has a few different meanings, and comi has something to do with, I think it's color. I looked it up before, now I've forgotten. And there's also committee and some things like that. So it's interesting. It looks like we might have had a root of that word. You know, it might have led into English.

But in any case, all these celestial bodies and beings and these flowers being rained upon the earth, and there is the opening and closing riffs. You can absolutely hear this. Ben said it was really quite a trippy dream that I remember still today, as if I had had it last night. And at the time, he'd been reading Jung's *Man and His Symbols*. So all of the tracks apparently have a dream state connection. He said we didn't go into details, but this is important, and I think it's important for a few reasons because the music, you know, this music really can transport us to other planes of thinking and consciousness, and as we're in the dance state, and even just as we're in the listening state.

And when we think about inspiration, you know, what is inspiring? Why are people making this music? What's the inspiration? What's behind it? And in this case, if it's coming from a vision, if it's coming from an actual remembered experience from another plane of consciousness, and then that gets put into musical form. That's what they're pointing to. I think there's automatically something in the music. I mean, of course, you have to do a good job of it, right? You know, in terms of creativity and also engineering and all of that. But I think that that's something where you know the inspiration is not just you know let's bang out a new tune, right? There's a purpose here. There's something that the artist is trying to convey. And I think all the great artists, and this is you know from the classical realm that I'm part of, I think they were all trying to point at something beyond.

And you know, my issue with a lot of how the the scene has gone now is people are trying to create something for a party. Well, okay, but why? And you know, is it just about people dancing? Is it about something else? And you know, what's what's the actual inspiration. What's the message? And so here, there is a message. There is a memory. There is, you know, an actual vision from another dimension that's being brought down. And I think that just infuses the music with a whole other level of power. The why of the what that we're listening to and dancing to is on another plane,

And also wanted to single out the the great collaborative teamwork because you know Juno Reactors always had these you know shifting members folks who come in and out. So I just want to name everybody who is you know was listed. They don't mention who did what on what track, but we have Ben Watkins, of course, Mike McGuire, who's been there since the beginning, Paul Jackson, A.K.A. Voodoo People, Johann Blay, A.K.A. O.N. Nick Burton and Maddie Thabajame. Sorry if not reading your name properly. And Xavier Xavier Morella. All incredible musicians in their own right and doing you know just this phenomenal collaborative work here.

So, okay, probably enough blabbering on. I did some of my postlude stuff in the prelude, and I'm really excited to Share this phenomenal track with you all. So let's listen now to Comet by Juno Reactor.

So you hear this, this sort of circular sound. For me, it really starts to imagine again those celestial bodies, the comet. That sound. It's like for me, it's the petals that are being rained upon the earth. And then that interesting pan. Now, as something wicked this way comes, baseline, which is a minor third, and then as all the notes, it descends on all the notes down to the the C, to the main note, the tonic. And it's almost like a slide. So there's a little bit of an angsty quality to it, which is interesting with all of the ethereal stuff going on above it. Just listen to the transparency how they coexist and there's no interference between them.

Some other interesting sounds coming in, and it's like this heartbeat. There's It's also an interesting rhythm to the baseline, where its third and fourth beats get more accented than it comes in on the first. Amazing percussion! The way it's got some different pitches happening, and the textures and the transparency is just so clear that these all coexist in their own realm and work together. Great rhythmic stuff there. I mean, you see what I mean? I mean, as much as this does, you know, this natural sort of phenomenon, you know, it's got this futuristic city feel to it as well.

And another round before this big dramatic line comes in. We've got those flower petals there. More of that space opera kind of sound here, right? Really, this angst-like cry from the center of the universe, center of our being, and it's this kind of insistence with this rhythm, huh? Still, we got those, you know, that flowery stuff, rhythmic stuff, just on that sort of mid-high plane there.

So we get the second repetition, and then just let's throw. Just this throaty quality, just the instrumentation, it's like nothing from this planet, even if it's a source from the guitar or something like that, then we get our feel the universe sort of alarm bells happening there. Reverb. There's going to be some choral cries happening as well coming up, a bit of brooding, a bit rhythm in there. Again, that insistence. Love the sort of the distorted bits there that sort of leave the sort of clearly toned note and distort. Then more of those alarm bells, some great reverb.

I think it's this round where the voices start coming in, right? Keep in mind, this is when Delta had just done, as a child, a gating. Whether there was any influence or not, all in the same wavelength here in terms of that cosmic Chorus, kind of celestial bodies, kind of energy. So, like that chorus took a while to fade out. It's just beautiful.

And then the creative structuring and storyline, right? It's not rigidly held by any stretch. And then that pick. Stretch, and then that kick, and that mantra-like effect of that, the bassline with that amazing rhythm, and then this, you can feel there's a buildup coming, but then it fades, and we get some higher percussion again. Those pedals. A little bit of some sort of sounds like glitches in the matrix happening almost sort of at the end there. Lately hypnotic, and then it breaks through for I think the final exposition.

And notice the rhythm. Great reverb. That descending line is now a bit higher more alarm bells Oops. That beautiful arpeggiated sequence. Not necessarily Arpeggiated, but just that up and down, fluttery quality. Notice the reverb again. It's almost like you know, sort of coming, going in or out of the dream state. I mean, seriously. What's ever been done that's remotely approaches that? Just on, it's a whole other level.

This is really like, you know, for me, a classical music level, timeless musical innovation, just in a you know in a different sphere. And you know, in that Matrix movie. Ben also worked with an orchestra, right? That highway scene, Mona Lisa Overdrive, is thirteen minutes of this fusion of synthesized and live orchestra music, which I think is. This is where I've always imagined this going. And as I said, from my first event that I went to in 1994, I heard this is where classical music has always wanted to go.

Like we can get sounds that are more evocative and communicate on a level beyond what any of the terrestrial, human-built analog sort of you know do this to create this sound, you know direct relationship between the structure of the instrument and the sound, kind of framework. It's just well beyond that. That's what we have here: just incredibly Creative sonorities, incredible, like you know, storyline. Each of the riffs just working together beautifully, and then just even the way that goes through this grand arc. And it's not just this boxy, you know. Here we're going to do a break here, and this is what it's going to sound like. It is just a completely organic story, and in its organic nature, is completely, you know, just transcends. I think any of the earthly plane limitations in its conception and what gets communicated. So completely next level.

Again, I am stunned that agents can't remember when I got this album. I probably didn't know what to make of it when I first heard it. You know, I mean, I've always loved Juno Reactor as I've talked about, but this was just like it's the sound is completely different, like that whole sonic framework, and it's really, you know, it becomes fascinating in terms of how do you work this kind of music into a DJ set where you know the framework and the sounds and so on are so different. And it's definitely doable.

There's a lot of this is one that I played a lot, "Children of the Night" on here, "Kaguya Himen," played at CNA in 2027. Of the night on here, Kaguya Hime played at CNA in 2017. There's a lot of, you know, interesting ways to tie this into the story. You know, I've often said, "Set's not a set without Juno Reactor." That's kind of it's a key flavor, even if their flavors are different in each track and in each album. It's a key component in the musical language of the psychedelic dance music framework.

So, so there we go. Absolutely phenomenal track. Thank you, Ben, for the insights. And I think no, gonna have to do something for this full album because there's just and all of them really. Let's face it. Might have to start going into some full album explorations because there's some incredible stuff in this scene of ours, and this is, you know, in a league of its own.

Desert Island. There was a program on the BBC, I think it's still running, called Desert Island Discs, where people had to choose. They had lots of famous people, musicians, and not. They had to choose ten records that they would take to a desert island if that's all they could listen to for the rest of their lives. This is one of them.

All right, folks. Thanks for tuning in. I'm Mark DJ Solitaire, wrapping up 117 episode 117 of Retro Goa Explorations. I'm leaving you now with the masterpiece by Juno Reactor, Comet.
