Artist: GMS
Song: One Small Creature
Year: 1997

Hey, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 125 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement.

Okay, so this track today, similar to the one in the previous episode is significantly slower than what has become the norm, and even that what was the norm at the time that it was released. So we're talking about tracks now that I first came across in the '97 to '98 season, so autumn of '97 through to the summer of '98. This one came out on CD in February Ninety-eight. It was on vinyl before that, but being a DAT jockey, I got things digitally. Occasionally, got things that were on vinyl transferred onto DAT, but usually got things on CD, and and then transferred them to DAT and played them on there. But this one, I first recall getting on this particular CD, and it is 134 BPM, and it sounds slower than a lot of the kicking stuff. Now we've talked about this before. A lot of the tracks in the first season that I covered from '94 to '95, it's quite surprising when you listen to the Dragonfly Order Otonata CD that the majority of those tracks are 130 to 134, only a couple of them are faster. It's rather startling because that seems like full pace when you listen to those tracks. When you listen to this one, it does sound slower than what it is that you know. Certainly than most of what was on this CD.

So, and this is a group, this project that was known for its very High-paced and rather frenetic, and uplifting and vivacious music. So I am talking about GMS, Growling Mad Scientists. They were usually referred to as Growling Mad Scientists, and then it sort of got shortened to GMS. And I think at this point, it was between the two. But this wonderful track that was at the end Of TIP Singles Three, One Small Creature. So this was the B side to a vinyl that had a track with a great pun title, Serial Killer, as opposed to Serial Killer. And we all ended up in some pretty surreal settings in these parties back in the day. But One Small Creature, for me, was always a standout. As soon as I got this and heard this one, I was like, "Oh yes!" And as I talked about in The Delta Skelter episode, you know, throwing on a slower track at a certain time of the party and of the set can really pack a punch. And this one is amazing because it's one of those ones where the energy builds up internally on such a powerful level, and it really gets you moving.

There is a lot going on with the phenomenal range of sonorities that they're using. Some really fantastic, sleek and cyber and otherworldly kind of sounds that they get. Now, GMS, as I said, were they were really masters at very high energy uplifting, wild, fun, wacky kind of stuff. And what can get overlooked with that external form of you know that quality of energy that they were able to really channel is some of the depth. And so it's very easy to assume that because something's really uplifting, it's not deep. Now, and with them, you know, they started. They produce all kinds of really wacky, fun, crazy stuff. This one, in particular, there's a lot to it. There's the bassline, there's the sounds. I love the sample, and there's just so much going on, and for me, this is one of the deepest ones they have produced. It is absolutely incredible. I think very much in need of a revival, being brought back into circulation. So I'm really happy to feature it in the series today.

So, without further ado, this masterpiece by the two primary musicians, as they would become the two final musicians Of GMS Richtam and Bansy, we're going to listen to now One Small Creature.

So just some whooshy sounds to start things off. Then listen to this bassline. Goes up on the third beat. There's a whole bunch of sounds that get introduced all at once that are really powerful. Get those very sleek, silky, quite sexy little pushes, and then the kick and just the the impulse of that third beat note change is quite amazing. Now everything here sounds like a voice. That little bouncy number, there's a bit of a bassline, and then there's that broody little extra voice in the bass that comes in occasionally. While there's all this great cyber stuff, I just love the way it's all punctuated with all of these sounds. So it's really like you know you're coasting through outer space while there's all these comets and things whizzing around you. It's really like all of these voices are communicating with one another and with you.

I mean, this is the stuff that you expect to have more at 1:45, right? So at 1:45. I mean, this is the stuff that you expect to have more at 145, right? So at 144, this is really building up the tension, and then you get uplifting sounds like that. Really get your energy moving up, but within a slower container, you feel it more. The way it disappeared and then came back down. Fascinating shift here, and the sample. one small creature, assembling more than anything else, a huge individual brain cell. Key change, very well done. Get that tension on the third beat. And it's got really just growly, growly mad scientist kind of sound. Let's hear some good laser zaps. You can hear some of that lower, broody, chesty kind of riff coming in there.

Change in the content here right. Suddenly the laser zaps disappeared. All the layering. It's just the delight in the otherworldly, sort of wacky kind of sounds. That kind of insistent riff there, but it's got this softer quality because of how it's voiced. And and then listen to the accenting here and again, they all sound like voices and it's fun and funky. Another one climbing. And is deep. It's really gnarly. It's like everything's been building up to this alien voice delivering this message on that lower frequency. And we get more Star Wars laser zaps. And then that that insistent rhythm but again it's just kind of got this soft but edgy voicing now we get that funky rhythm that's more highlighted. Cool climb happening again. This wraps up the first great wash upwards. This up and down situation.

Oh, I mean that is really quite a Journey, and it's not a long one. Let me just check; it's just under seven minutes. There's a lot of content. There's a lot going on there, and even at that pace, and I think because of that pace, there's incredible tension. There's variety. There's this amazing storyline. You know that shift of key and texture and everything in that middle section before it returns. It was extraordinarily well done, and I love the spoken sample. This reference to a creature that resembles a brain cell, and for me at the time, and thinking back to it, it still brings to mind this kind of framework of each of us being almost like one cell in a giant cosmic brain.

And I just I love the sample , and I mean that's a great track to end a set on, but I think also to just do a kind of a transition and then pick things up, or do you know if you're doing this kind of slower section in a set, it's really powerful. You know we are really at a time where BPMs are getting faster and faster, and there's all these, you know, subgenres of music now, they're just at like a pretty frenetic pace, and you know, you think that yeah, you know, there's more power when there's more speed. Well, listen to this, tons of power, and it really gets your energy Pumping and ramped up because the framework is more controlled with that slower tempo. You know, there's that real tension between you know speed and content. I think this is an absolute masterpiece. I think it's sorely underappreciated as we're now at this time when even looking back, we're really looking at you know generally still tracks that are 140 and above. Certainly, high 130s, not you know below 135. But this, I think, I think we really need to revisit this when it comes to newer music as well. I actually ended my set at ZNA playing new music in 2024 with a significantly slower track. It was around this speed kind of thing, it might have been 128 even, and packed a punch, right? It really does something.

So let's continue exploring some of these slower masterpieces and seeing what it is we could do to really create that flow. I think in DJ sets. In any case, I'm going to sign off and let you hear that whole track with all of its incredible sonorities and textures and voices, and you can really just you know kick back and you know close your eyes and listen, or have a good little stomp around wherever it is that you are. I'm Mark DJ Solitaire, wrapping up episode 125 of Retro Goa Explorations, and leaving you with the complete, wonderfully creative and uplifting track by GMS, Growling Mad Scientists, One Small Creature.
