Artist: Tim Schuldt
Song: Inner Child
Year: 1997

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 127 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly or nearly weekly series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So this is an artist today that I have featured in a collaboration, but not his solo work, and it's really important that he do because we're talking like one awesome producer and composer. And I am not sure if I got this track in the first part of '97 or the latter part of '97. So you know, right now we're in sort of the autumn of '97 through to summer of '98 period. I might have gotten. Seven through to summer of '98 period. I might have gotten this track slightly before that, and I'm not sure. But when I was looking back, I was like, "Oh no, I kind of need to feature this track because this was my introduction to this artist, and I really fell in love with his really big, dramatic orchestral style." I'm talking about the German producer Tim Schuldt.

A few episodes ago, I featured his collaboration with—I think it was X-Dream. Certainly, Marcus was in there. The Groupie Syndrome, that unbelievable track, Pacemaker. When I first came across Tim Schuldt's music, there was a couple of tracks that came to me, but the one that I really remember was a Matsuri single. The single was called Animatronic, and that was one track. But it was the other side, Inner Child, that really hit me. So again, this was released at some point in '97. I started receiving Matsuri promos, probably you know mid '97 or so, Mayish. So, I might have received this vinyl around that time. It might have been a little later because this was a vinyl-only track, and it is really quite an incredible one.

Now, Schuldt comes from a background that's pretty varied—you know, rock, grunge, industrial, techno, kind of thing—and he's a guitarist. And so, you know, we certainly heard that guitar in Pacemaker. But what we get really is in all of his music. There's rich harmonies, you know. It's not just exclusively, you know, that techno hard edge kind of thing. So this is something that I really appreciate because if you had that sort of metal and industrial background, you're not necessarily expecting some of those grand, dramatic, melodic lines, but we do have that, and it is one of the real hallmarks of his music, and I think one of the real hooks for me.

Now you know I've got a classical background. Sometimes there's some modulations and so on that don't really fit with classical theory, and it really depends on the track. If I'm gonna, you know, if there's enough other stuff going on for it, then I'll play it. If there's modulations that are really off, I just, I just won't do it. And with Tim Schuldt, you know, there's sometimes some, you know, interesting shifts in key and sort of part of the exposition. But what really catches me is the drama, you know, that space opera kind of Thing, I mean, there is really something Wagnerian about this. Like, we're not talking; everything's on a big scale, like Wagner operas. Those ones, you know, the average opera is like two hours. Wagner, Wagner ones are like three to four hours, right? So, the average track is like, you know, and coherence is like six, seven, eight minutes, and Tim Schuldt ones are like ten minutes or so, right? So, there's that drama, but also, you know, similarly that big orchestral, um, full. That big orchestral, full power, atmosphere, which really reminds me of that kind of thing. And it's not like it's on a big canvas. It's not even on a canvas. Literally, like talking, you know, you're in fully immersed in this multi-dimensional setting.

So, really, really brilliant music making, and I think a really key sound for the nighttime aspect of the journey of this kind of music, and so it's really taken me a little too long, in fact, to feature him as a solo artist. And I'm really glad to be doing that with this particular track. So, given that it's a pretty long track, and don't really have much else to say, I'll have lots to say while we're listening. Let's give this one a listen.

So I am going to cue it up here, and we are going to listen to Tim Schuldt's really beautiful and powerful and expansive and explosive Inner Child. So I really like this soft, evocative sonority in the introduction. Always love choral voices. The way those two beautiful, beautiful sounds, both of them, the way they work together. Powerful slide there. Fantastic sonorities. And then. And then, fantastic bassline. Really incredible sounds, right? So some really cyber stuff, but also, you know, that operatic quality with that chorus. And some interesting laughs there, and then what a kick! And it comes with that other sound. So this one, not explicitly voices, but voice-like, right? This real exclamation, right? And that repetition, very common in German music, but other one as well, where it has that really operatic quality.

So you get yourself into this hypnotic loop, breaking the pattern there with the chorus dropping out. Wonderful gated voices, and again there's a call and answer. Goes up, seems to answer from the and that massive, massive kick, just it really keeps the sonic framework wide and open. Another round, you know, just to get that repetition going and get you sort of fully hypnotized and immersed. Here we start getting at this, you know, you got all this big drama and hard stuff, and then you've got here we're tugging on the heartstrings with these harmonies, doubling up those very cool percussive elements. I. I mean, this is just absolutely like hyperdrive shooting through space, and this is really like you know the anguish coming from the soul here. And with a title like Inner Child, I mean, you know, what kind of emotional stuff are we releasing in this cathartic process, dancing to this music, up an octave.

So now we get that chorus coming back with this evolution of that melodic riff, just beautiful. And again, you know that really strong, powerful kick. Wow, there's this absolutely gorgeous, heartwrenching, and then melodic aspect going on. Another evolution of it here. Another wonderful little break here, so you just get that, you know, percussive element with this beautiful voice again, and then this key shift. Shift. Not really a key shift, right, but the melody sort of shifts down. Very clever with a half tempo kick, and that sort of more sinewy, whiny kind of sound. Also very clever use of percussion. And you know, these are the the necessary breaks when you're storming so much in this music. Again, those wild and crazy laughs. Then it's gonna get explosive very quickly again.

Really wonderful, just the way it gets on. After all that melodic stuff, it just gets stripped down to the kick and this raw, this guttural kind of sound. The chorus is back. And the chorus is back. So now we have a different harmonic presentation over here, right? So this is like this big climactic section here. Section here. I'm repeating it with some duplication. So now we start getting some interesting key shifts, right? And notice how after that intensity and the drama there, now we're back into that softer, beautiful aspect here, and we get a shift there. Those voices as well on that upper level. Another shift. And a shift down again. I love the way there's that lyrical legato singing while there was those more articulated passages. And then... Yeah, doubled up the octave. We're back to that chorus, look at that exclamation, and those gated voices.

It's really well-structured, right, to really allow for some really smooth mixing and transition. Again, it continues through all those 8-bar sections. I mean, really. Even though I never heard that in Japan in my first series, like my first, you know, couple of years of partying there, this is the kind of sound and power that I remember. You know, especially when Cooney was playing at those Equinox parties. You know, this is a real three o'clock in the morning kind of sound for me, like outdoors. You're in the depth of the darkness. You things are really peaking and getting more and more intense. And you know, there's there's all kinds of different flavors that work at nighttime, right? Because there still is that really electrifying, uplifting, celebratory nighttime stuff. This is where you know things really turn inwards before you know that dark, dark point before there starts being this transition into the light. And this is just the epitome of the kind of tracks that I think are really required at that time.

So I was a huge fan of Tim Schuldt for producing this particular kind with this unique blend, as I've talked about several times in the series. You know, part of the human experience being a contrasting blend of emotions. Simultaneously, we have different kinds of emotions, right? So we can be, you know, ecstatic and expressive while also having some anguish or you know, some confusion or some doubts or whatever the case may be. Humans do experience more than one thing at a time, and music like this, with that grand, dramatic beauty, with those powerful exclamations, with those laughs and that beautiful chorus, and yet those you know sleek, elegant, beautiful, heart-wrenching, melodic lines. I mean, there's a whole blend going on here, and I think it's absolutely brilliant. And it's really part of that unique sound signature that Tim Schuldt brought into his tracks, and you know, lots of them in his collaborative work and his solo projects.

So, this has long been a favorite. What's interesting for me is, you know, animatronic. The other side—that was the title track of the single, so that was intended to be the main track. For me, this is the main track. This is the one that I always gravitated towards. The other one is fantastic, absolutely, but I don't know what it was. Whether it's, you know, just the name, Inner Child, and what that represents, and you know, what we're all getting in touch with, you know, getting more and more into our core as we go through these transformative dance experiences, or if it's just that real Wagnerian operatic, dramatic, operatic, big scale, multidimensional aspect of this track. But whatever the case may be, hats off, Maestro Schuldt, and I'll sign off here so you can hear the whole track without me talking over it.

So I'm Mark, DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode one hundred and. So I'm Mark, DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode 127 of Retro Goa Explorations, and leaving you now with the Titanic creation by Tim Schuldt, Inner Child.
