Artist: Koxbox
Song: Stay Psychedelic
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 131 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I present in every episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are still exploring tracks that I first came across in the 97-98 season, so roughly the autumn of 97 through to the end of the summer of ninety eight, and this was really an incredible time in the scene, with new artists coming out with their productions and groups and projects that soloists that were creating music in the early days of the scene, continuing to evolve their sound, you know, both in terms of production and creativity of the stories and so on that they were creating in their music, and this is one of those early projects. It's one of my all-time favorite groups, and this is one of my favorite tracks that they produced. And I think it's a little bit underappreciated because it was not on one of their albums; it was a bonus track on a CD single.

And I remember when I got this. It was I was in Tokyo in November '97. This was when I found out that Japan Airlines was offering a 99 pound return for a weekend in Tokyo, and I marched to the Dragonfly office and dragged Richard Purple by the arm to the travel agent so that we could both go. And we played gigs. He went back after three days. I ditched the expensive return portion, or sorry, the inexpensive return portion, and paid a very high fee to get back to the UK. Unfortunately, but while I was there, I visited lots of friends since I had lived there, and one of my friends who had once come to a party introduced him to it, and he loved it. And we were around the Shibuya district and wandered into the Tokyo, the Cisco Techno shop in the Shibuya area where everybody used to go get their vinyls and CDs. And I saw this absolutely gorgeous piece of work, Blue Room single by Koxbox with Life Is.... that has the Life Is a Gas remix by X-Dream. And my friend insisted on buying it. He's like, oh, let me, let me, you know. I'm glad you're back in Tokyo. And there's a bonus track on here that wasn't anywhere else. It wasn't on the Dragon Tales album that came out the same year. It hasn't. I mean, it's been around. I think on some obscure comps or you know some of those non-label comps, but not on an album or somewhere more visible, not on vinyl that I know.

Stay Psychedelic. I mean, great title. Definitely as things I thought were starting to move away from being the kind of psychedelic that I was into. And now this track was probably written at least the year before because they played it at the Burning Man live, right? And so that was—it was definitely written then, because it was in in the 1996 appearance that they made in the desert with their synthesizers, you know, with the three musicians. So Peter Candy was also there, and AB was playing didgeridoo. It was really quite a to do. So it was probably written by the three of them. Now on the credits, it says Koxbox with Ian Ion, but Franke Madsen from Koxbox and Ian Ion would later become Coxbox, as well as Psychopod, or they already were at this point. So Peter's not on the credits, but it might be part of him. So maybe it's just because it's assumed that he's part of Coxbox. I don't know.

In any case, this is a masterpiece. It's a brilliant production. It's got great sounds. It's got a kind of a two-part introduction, which is really, really clever. There's a whole gorgeous storyline. There's some great intervals with a neat minor second, and at a very key celebratory point, a perfect fifth. And the sounds are just magnificent, and all the voices. I mean, it really is psychedelic and otherworldly in a way that you know, Coxbox was just so brilliant at crafting. So, not much else to say. I think there's lots to say while we listen, because again, there's a lot going on. It is very psychedelic, and you know, it's interesting. I'll just throw this in out now, just that you know, it was called Goa trance back then. Nobody was calling it psychedelic trance yet. The word psychedelic was, of course, used. But I find it ironic that you know, as as things were starting to change, and we have this gorgeous psychedelic track called "Stay Psychedelic." Now things are called psychedelic trance, and they are really kind of less psychedelic than they used to be. Certainly than this masterpiece from nearly thirty years ago, so let's give this a listen. Coxbox and their glorious production Stay Psychedelic.

So, little murmurs. Love this voice with this echo, and it's going to repeat again. And there's this cool whoosh that comes up into a neat break. This voice. This voice again it's like this being has arrived and it's making its statement it repeats it again with some different atmospheric noise in the background The whole sounds like australian bulb life so it makes a number of presentations of that riff, and then this voice comes in, in a very Koxbox voice. I just love the tension that gets created with this. You know, it's it's pitched, but without tones. This voice, right? And that one comes back, and you know just the shaping of all of these voices, and you know so this is where on a big system it's really going to take on dimension and shape. Now we get that very sneaky baseline here. I think it's a variation of what would come in Stratosfear and Stratosfearless, which was released before this. There's some neat echoes going on there, and these are all—if you listen carefully—they're really swimming around dimensionally.

And then, so this is really like one of those cosmic carnival kind of tracks where it's absolutely alien, it's uplifting, it's weird, it's twisted, and here comes this riff right from the introduction with these other voices interacting with it. So you know they sound like different voices, but they also create one melodic line. This important subject here. Oh, not yet. Here we go. Right. So they really do. I mean, again, you know, even if you've heard this music for a while, it can thrill you up. Wonderful whoosh. Let's another bassline here. There's another bass line here, and just that wild open upper stuff. So there's the rhythm and the pattern, right, as well as the shifts in tonality. I love this gating and this echoing. Just these tones, right? And this neat combination. So a lot of call and answer going on here. Here. You know, again the like with the Orichalchum when we heard recently, you know, there's just that little slightly off pitch that just draws you in. Great washes, very catchy, right? Wild sounds.

Notice the shift in the beat. This is an unbelievable build up there. This is unbelievable buildup here. Really shifted from the rhythm, right, and the propulsion of the track. Notice that bassline keeps building up. Just don't know when it's gonna break, and it does so just before the beat. Really throws you off. And then it's just this ecstatic exclamation with all these joyous aliens coming into the forest. We get more of those sort of helicopter kind of sounds. Right, wash again. Right, whoosh again, so pay attention to the rhythm of this, so it's got this real wonderful great use of percussion. It's this continual climb. Or percussion. Then we get this unbelievably celebratory, uplifting, yay, we made it! Kind of riff. It's just fantastic for the morning or approaching the end of a party.

And then in the background, what we got is a perfect fifth. So it goes from an E up to an A. The whole this is in A. This the whole track. All these other intervals are dancing around, and you know the upward, you know resolution into the tonic, into the main note of the key, really brings this level of gratification and you know resolution triumph. So part of that uplifting, and. And percussion so well done to create tension, and so you know this non-stop loop really is hypnotic. And sounds the. The sounds, the sounds are just so beautiful. It's like, how many times are we gonna go through this? Now it starts to unwind. Let's hear that descent happening. I'm gonna end with a beautiful whoosh. Takes us into the next dimension, right? And that can just tie in beautifully with wherever the DJ is taking the story with the next track.

Wow, what a gorgeous, gorgeous, otherworldly, carnival-like, uplifting, celebratory, completely trippy out there, you know what's going on, kind of thing. You know, because we've heard this several times now, right? I think anybody watching this might have heard this before. If not, hooray! It's wonderful you get to experience this as if it's new because it's new to you. You know, this is one of the challenges of having heard these amazing tracks over and over again. We can love them. I can still be surprised by them. Like it's just like when is that break coming? But you know, the first time you hear something like this and how this sounded in 1997, and certainly for anybody who was at that, you know, at their live performances. And I heard them in in London in in August of 97. So they probably played this then. I mean, it's just like a whole other musical dimension—the voices, the storyline, the intervals, the interplay of all of those different voices, where sometimes they sound like one voice, with you know, saying different things, or sometimes you hear them as completely different voices as part of a larger conversation. It's just absolutely masterful.

So truly psychedelic, and also by the way, at a wonderful BPM of 142, which is one of the less usual ones, but I think a great one. Quite often things at 140, 144, but you know back then we definitely had 141, 142, 43 going on. Just one of my all-time favorite tracks from this period, and one of the glorious ones from Koxbox, who you know were also doing their Psychopod tracks at the time, and just really pushing the boundaries of what musical, harmonic languages and storyline structures could offer. So hats off, gentlemen, and I will sign off here to leave you with the complete track without my commentary.
