Artist: Anubis
Song: Rites Of Ra & Temple Of The Moon
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 134 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the Goa trance psychedelic dance movement of the 1990s. Slight variation today in that I am going to be featuring two tracks by this project because they only made two dance tracks, and I think it's a fabulous collaboration. And I was listening to both, trying to decide which one to feature, and I was like, okay, we might as well do both. So that's what we're going to do.

But you know, the set that alerted me to, hey, I haven't featured this yet, is this wonderful Return to the Source compilation, Sacred Sites, that came out actually in the summer of nine. Return to the Source compilation, Sacred Sites, that came out actually in the summer of '97. So this is just a little bit before the overall period that I've been covering in the series at this point, from you know autumn of '97 through to the summer of '98. But I have not yet featured this fantastic collaboration between Simon Posford, the Hallucinogenius, And Chris Deckker of Medicine Drum, who founded Return to the Source, and so I'm going to feature both of their dance tracks. They also have an ambient track, but that won't be featured today. And the one on here is Rites Of Ra, and the one that was on the Transient Dawn compilation, which I can't put my hands on. Wonderful one. They came out just around the same time. This is like June, July, ninety-seven. That one is Temple of the Moon.

So you know, Hallucigen was of course playing at all events, is working with all kinds of producers at the time, and Chris Decker was a major figure because he was throwing you know the biggest regular ongoing parties in London, there were lots of one-offs that you know might have been bigger. There were other regular events that happened less regularly, and Return to the Source was you know a monthly event. When I moved to London in September '96, they were taking place at the Fridge in Brixton, and but a lot of you know they'd had places that they'd had other venues that they ended up at Bagleys. I think they might have started at Bagleys before they were at the Rocket. It was, you know, it was bringing a lot of attention to the Goa trance scene at the time. And there is film footage of you know the events and you know at the time.

And Chris definitely prioritized the spiritual side of these events and the potential of these events, and you know they did rituals before the opening. I didn't actually see too many rituals during. There was one occasion at Brixton Academy where there was, and I think that was just the Earth Dance one. So, but in any case, you know, Return to the Source was a major event. Chris was also part of Medicine Drum, and you know, of course, majorly he was the drummer, and we get to hear in this collaboration with Simon Posford his wonderful organic drumming with Simon's synthesized magic, and it's really beautiful atmosphere. Both of the tracks are you know under one forty, so they're in the mid one thirty s range, beautifully evocative, and they've got that melodic quality that you know when Simon Posford was doing that kind of stuff, it was just magic, right? Those evocative, otherworldly, mystical, sensual melodies, and it's got you know some beautiful aeration, beautiful mood, and so on.

So I knew Chris at this time, so this is actually a copy that he gave me. He lived about a ten-minute bike ride from me in London. So once I started going to return to the source events regularly, and got to know, you know, I'd met Sioshi by this time, and then got to meet the whole crew. Chris and I would hang out fairly regularly and talk about all kinds of stuff, including a lot of the spiritual side of our scene. I'm not 100. You know, it's a it's a it's an open debate, and I think I'll probably make different videos about this in terms of you know discussing the different parties and the events that I went to, and looking back what I think worked, what didn't work. You know how overt you are with the spiritual side of things at events is open for debate, right? So not everybody's into it. Some people just want to go and they just want to dance, and there could be the spiritual side of that. And the spiritual stuff can be in the background as opposed to in the foreground. And so I know that you know some people were not super on board with you know the chakra journey or whatever else they were doing. I think it's a brilliant concept. So you know, I love, but I loved you know what they were doing. I loved the intention, and I loved the fact that there was this regularity, and it was a place for people to go. They definitely had you know top top musicians, and you know this is this was the third set. I remember getting the first Return to the Source set in my first year of you know, exploring the scene, and of course, you know there are so many great ones, some of which I featured in this series. And so then, when the Chakra Journey came out, of course, I was fully on board, and I was very excited to go to their events in London. And you know, it was it was it was a great time.

This compilation, I mean, luxurious production. They just started getting better and better. You know, with this really fantastic booklet, all kinds of stuff in there. Interestingly, the first text on feng shui, which I was just starting to explore at the time, and yeah, so the transient album dawn, which had the the temple of the moon track that Anubis did, Simon and Chris did together. I can't locate my copy of that. The Rites Of Ra is on this one, and we're going to listen to both because they're both just beautiful in their own different ways.

Just a little background in terms of you know Anubis was an Egyptian god relating to the you know protection in the afterlife. Rites of Ra. It's interesting that you know rites of Ra is rise on here and not Temple of the Moon because you know Temple of the Moon would have been a sacred site, but there we go. Temple of the Moon. There's two of them. There's one in Peru and there's one in Mexico, so I'm not sure which it refers to. And Rites Of Ra. Ra was an Egyptian god as well. Just a little FYI. I mean, the Egyptian stuff was always really big for me. You know, I was really fascinated by the culture growing up.

And Chris got the idea for Earth Dance, having you know a party taking place around the world at different times, but everybody was unified with one the same piece of music at the same time. That idea came to him when he was in the King's Chamber. I think it's the King's Chamber with the the big pyramid in Egypt. He got to you know if you get the right guide at the right time, they'll let you, you know, go in. And he was meditating in what was, you know, ostensibly officially referred to as a sarcophagus, but it's not. It's like just it was a meditation chamber. And the idea came to him in a flash. And so I was living in London when the first Earth Dance took place. And in fact, I wrote the promotional text, which appeared in Dream Creation, and the press release that sort of went around. So that's kind of you know the Egyptian connection extended beyond these tracks, you know, with that having his actual visit and that meditation being what led to the creation of Earth Dance, which is still happening.

So without further ado, why don't we get started listening to these wonderful tracks by Hallucinogen Simon Posford and Medicine Drum Chris Deckker and their project Anubis. We will start off with the one from the rites of sorry, the Sacred Sites release on Return to the Source Rites Of Ra.

Beautiful voice. And she's doing, you know, she's sliding between notes on the keyboard. Gorgeous choral effect, sort of interval effect here, and that beautiful chord. Beautiful blend of the natural with the synthesized here, right? Synthesized is in the background, and then fantastic rhythm and the placement, the engineering of everything is just exquisitely transparent. Then wonderful upbeat atmosphere sphere here, syncopated hi-hats there, very beautifully placed. And you know, you just have that wonderful eight-bar cycle where things get added each round. It's just a natural, organic progression. There we go. Just got that Simon Posford Hallucinogen touch. That is, you know, the peak Posford Hallucinogen touch, at the peak of this period where he was just really on fire with Twisted and all of that stuff happening. Those effects. This really simple harmonic hook and it just grabs you. And that voice comes back with that beautiful gating that we all loved, but for, you know, from Angelic particles, a year or two before this. And again, this interval, beautiful. Let me get that.

Now we go lower, now we start getting into more synthesized voices. And again, you know, I've talked about this many, many times, how many riffs would sound like voices from another dimension. That's very much the case here. So this mantra-like effect. You'll notice that it's just the frequency that that's held at that really shakes things up and opens things up, and you get that chorus happening, and you get those upper percussive bits from Chris. And there's this kind of anticipation with this particular interval with that riff. Another round, now we're really getting, you know, very mantra-like. Now there's a great break, and then shift. And we really get both musicians at their peak here, right? With, you know, just that one line from each of them, and that more intense, distorted, otherworldly kind of voice, the texture, something I love with this. Now we're really getting, you know, hearing that natural voice with its electronic component. Super sensual and beautiful. The way the percussion drops out. Let's capture breath, but still and move, whatever the case may be. And then the storytelling is just amazing, right? Notice how you just start getting this new material. There's this whole long flow of the whole story. Notice that more aerated sounds here, which are going to be hearing in the other track as well. And that evocative lyrical upper line there. Nice surge there. Just love that that little rise at the top of that roof, those voices come in again. Long hypnotic process here.

Okay, so this was all kind of a long outro. I mean, beautiful, right? And by this phase, by this time in '97, there was already starting to be a move away from the more beautiful melodies, you know. Certainly by '98, we're hearing things be really a lot more stripped down. And of course, there's always been some of that more intense and harder music. It's always been part of the scene. But there was definitely starting to be a little bit of a rebellion against this kind of beauty, to be honest. And I still love this stuff. I mean, this is really it's it's something that gets you, you know, gets the emotions going. There's other emotions, of course, that can get going from other stuff, and it's all part of the big journey. But I think having this kind of lyrical beauty with those really polished, sleek, elegant sounds, I think it's really, you know, a touch of otherworldly psychedelic class.

So why don't we give a listen to the other track, "Temple Of The Moon, this one came out on Transient Dawn around the same time in the June-July sort of window of 1997, and it's another absolutely stellar collaboration between Simon Posford and Chris Deckker. Here we go, Temple of the Moon.

Again, some you know tribal sort of samples. Nice little . It's just very slightly key shift there in the lower sort of bit. The percussion is a bit different here. Love that synth sound. Notice the rhythm here. You know, this would always happen in those in the tracks. There, it's like you know, there's this introduction, and there would be this riff that gets introduced, and there's that pattern really triggers something in your consciousness as it gets repeated. So it was like each track was holding some kind of message that was encoded inside these patterns, right? And several patterns, and there's the whole story. That aerated sound, and then, and again, light and floaty and beautiful.

So we get different layers of percussion happening here. You know that more crisp, more pronounced stuff coming from Chris. I'm sure. You know, definitely some mystical harmonies, and then you get those aerated, sort of crisp, sort of almost like you know, sort of voices going out into cold air, and you see the mist with it. And I love the sliding between tones, and of course, that beautiful gating, patterning, and then the the harmonic language here is super evocative. Lots of. Lots of pitch sliding happening here. Just so fluid and elegant. Just that, just that little rise. Just so, I mean, you know when morning music was morning music. When you had this kind of beauty in the morning, kick drops out, a little bit more of that percussive stuff, and then kick comes back. Very sneaky and sinewy kind of line. Hmm.

Notice that there's so many layers. There's some stuff going on in the background there that's almost imperceptible, but you tune in and you hear this kind of drone-like effect that's in the background of all of these gated voices, and then you get this wonderful transformation here. Of course, gorgeous voice, which both Simon and Chris loved. Just that percussive element, very, very gentle. A little bit more texture coming in now with some percussion. Just everything comes in so seamlessly. You can feel it building in the background. And we're back some fantastic accenting on the offbeats. Little harmonic shift here. Just so many different sounds, and they're all you know. There's a lot of vibrating going on here, a lot of shimmering, slightly more granular sound in the mid range there. Voice. That voice, kind of a little bit in the background, getting a bit louder again, continually louder and then we get that. The circularity of this harmonic loop here, really well done. We're gonna have the voice come back as the outro begins, it just fades out.

I mean, just beautiful, right? I mean, this is one of the fantastic things about our scene. We have such a range of styles that fit within this umbrella and that fit within a storyline. You know, from you know sunset through the darkness, and then the dawn, and then you know full daylight, and all kinds of different possibilities, and this as a psychedelic possibility having beauty, and you know that refinement, and both the terrestrial, you know, earthly human, and that otherworldly alien kind of beyond our three dimensions component, you know, and having those fused so beautifully—I mean, just really, absolutely exquisite stuff.

So, hats off to Simon Posford and Chris Deckker for these two wonderful creations. There's a third track, a downtempo one, that's on the Eclipse compilation on Twisted Records. It came out in '98. I think it's called Invocation, another fantastic one. And at the time that this came out, I remember saying to Chris, "I was like, I hope you guys do some more." And he's like, "Oh, you know, you know, I really, I want to." And you know, he had plans to, and and unfortunately, didn't happen. And you know, thank goodness we have the ones that we do.

So I wanted to feature both today because I just can't choose between them, and I think that they're both really a welcome reflection on some of the musical range that we've got available in our scene and some of the beauty that's been created. So, on that note, I will sign off and I'm going to present both tracks one after the other without my commentary. I'm Mark DJ Solitare, wrapping up episode 134 of Retro Goa Explorations, and leaving you now with the two dance tracks by Anubis, Rites Of Ra, and Temple Of The Moon.
