Artist: Man With No Name
Song: Possessed
Year: 1998

Hey, there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 141 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So, this is going to be the last episode of 2025. We are still in the 1997 to 98 season, and this is a really special Ninety-seven to ninety-eight season, and this is a really special track for several reasons.

And I think a lot of us have had those experiences where you know a certain track played at a certain party, it just really stays with us. Those of you who've been watching the series know my memory is pretty amazing, and so a lot of that stayed with me and is still there. So I really remember very clearly, like a lot about this jaw-dropping event and the track that closed the party. So I'm going to go into that whole contextual hello before we listen to this amazing music.

So I've already featured a couple of tracks in this series in this season that came out on *Man With No Name's* album on *Perfecto, Earth Moving the Sun*, and this is the Japanese edition, which includes the incredible track *Mainframe*, which was not on the regular edition and is one of my all-time favorite tracks. But the two tracks that I got from this album before it was released in 1998, I got in 1997. It was either may or August. I know that's how my brain works, but it was around the time of this party in may, or it was a few months later. I remember doing some DAT exchanges with Crispo, and he offered me these two unbelievable tracks by Man With No Name, Tarantula, which I've already featured in the series, and Possessed, and both absolutely jaw dropping in different ways.

So this track, I first remember hearing because of the context at this unbelievable party in Japan in may, towards the end of May, Nineteen ninety-seven. I flew to Japan for this party. I know I'm one of those people, but it was really worth it. This was one of the really the most memorable ones. This was a Return to the Source at Mount Fuji. Then it was put on by an outfit called Rainbow Two Thousand, who some of us began to affectionately or not so affectionately, call Raincoat 2000, because after their first really successful party, it just rained at every single event.

And those of us who are a little bit more, you know, paying attention to the energy of, you know, party dynamics and promoters and events and so on, some of us may have had thoughts about the fact that nature was rebelling against, you know, these kinds of events being put on in a way that wasn't really aligned, and that's certainly what it felt like when this started.

So, as leading up to the event, I was there early with my friends Carla and So, because I was friends with Chris Deckker already, and he got me this all-access pass to this event. And we went early, and we were all kind of dejected because we were just in a cloud. It was just misty, it was foggy, you could not see Mount Fuji. It was kind of dismal, and I remember walking down. It was like a ski slope with a teepee for a DJ booth at the bottom of the slope, and it was all wet and it was uncomfortable. And it was we were you know we set up a tent, and it was, you know, we weren't really so enthused because we were expecting, you know, this is going to be this amazing high-energy party and, you know, beautiful Mount Fuji right there. Different location from where Ollie played his, you know, October 1995 full moon party. That was a flat field. This one was a slope, and so, you know, all the wet went down to the bottom and made it quite muddy.

But here's what happened: Everybody just kept dancing anyway, so the party starts. Incredible sound system, and everybody is going for it. I mean, full on going for it, and that's what parties in Japan were really like. Incredibly uplifting, vibrant, enthusiastic, and they just did not let the rain get them down.

And then something changed. As it was going on, I think Medicine Drum might have been first, or it might have been someone else. You know, they they might have sort of been more towards the middle of the night. But I've got the full lineup over here. I remember some of the sequencing, but not all of it. Imagine that detail escaped the iron claws of my brain.

But I remember that it was when Keisuke was playing. Keisuke was a Japanese you know Matsuri DJ who is. Playing, Keisuke was a Japanese Matsuri DJ who is now a sushi chef. That was the lineage he came from. While he was playing, the this the sky cleared. Everybody just kept on dancing, and all of the clouds it just cleared, and there was this moonlight illuminating Mount Fuji. And Keisuke is down there just playing. You know, he could barely see the mixer, because he just had tears in his eyes the entire time, as did some of us.

And you know, remember that's when he played Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep, and I can't remember what else, but it was just amazing. And so people just kept on going more, because it's like you know, nature's listening to this like enthusiasm is what it felt like, right?

And then Tsuyoshi Suzuki's on afterwards; he's playing around dusk, and that's when he played As a Child I Could Walk on the Ceiling. As a Child I Could Walk on the Ceiling when we are on the slope, looking down, and we're above the clouds, right? I mean, this is really quite a setting. While Mount Fuji is illuminated on the side of us with you know the snow peak, we got some photos of it in the morning, not so much at nighttime, and and then it's sunrise, and then it's you know unbelievable, and Everybody just just kept on going,

And you know there were some Brits who were there who were part of the party scene, and you know I've complained here and was complaining then already, you know even after just you know not too long in the UK, that the parties were a little bit, you know lacking in that nth degree of vibe. If I could use the word Atheist, for lack of a better term, there just wasn't the sense that there was a spiritual thread connecting. Even at events like you know Return to the Source, which was very spiritually themed, not everybody who's going was there. Just it didn't always permeate. And I'm not talking about the external, you know, trappings, you know, the external signs of that in terms of you know their seven pointed star and whatever else they did. It was just, you know, in terms of the crowd vibe.

So it seemed to me, that folks who were in the scene for quite a while were jaded. I was still, you know, I was not jaded at this point. I was a bit jaded with the UK, but not in the overall context of these of this part of these parties.

And I remember some folks who were there after sunrise on the side who I had seen, I know who were involved with the return to the source, and they were just speechless. They were just their jaws dropping and looking at this nature and looking at this, and they're like, "Wow, this is what it can be like." I'm like, "Yeah, this is what I've been trying to say."

So this was just—it was absolutely incredible, and it was muddy in the morning. It was muddy at night, of course, when it was raining, but the mud was there, and people are going off. It was just fantastic, and so Mark Allen, of Whom I managed to get a photo on that occasion. I'm not sure how I was able to focus with an old school regular camera, but here we go.

He plays this, the last track of the party, Possessed by Man With No Name, and I mean, you know, this and Own the World, but it's sort of similar in vibe in terms of this, you know, sense of you know we are the custodians of the planet, you know that we are, and we're reawakening to sort of our roots and connection to nature and connection to the beyond, and that's what this electronic music seemed to be, you know, being beamed down, and so it was this, you know, with Mount Fuji being this real power source, kind of location, it was incredible, and so he plays this to close the party.

Everybody goes completely wild, right? We're above the clouds. You can see me here jumping up in the air, sort of in front of the clouds. A photo taken with you know the first digital camera that I was able to get with no flash, so it's very you know silhouetted and low pixels and all of that. But you know you can see above the clouds, and you know a regular photo that Shows a little bit more definition, including the same shirt that I'm filming this episode in.

Then, as an encore, by the way, he played a track by Masa that would be on Return to the Source's Sacred Sites, which includes Mount Fuji. And Masa goes running down the hill with arms in the air, you know, just completely over the moon that his track is being played. You know, as an encore, no less. You know, after this incredible "Man With No Name" track. You know, after a little pause, it was just absolutely amazing.

And so, you know, this was just an incredibly special event. And I really noticed a bit of an attitudinal shift on the part of some folks who were there once they got back to the UK, because they're like, " Oh my gosh! You know, like this is why we're doing it, and this is the challenge, right? That we can all have after you've been doing this for so long, you get used to the mechanics of it. That is like, are you really having the spirit of it? And so, this event was really one of those like refreshers and reminders.

And so, for me, you know, the tracks that I named already so far, and the one that I'm featuring today by Man With No Name, Martin Freeland, Possessed is really one that reminds us, reminds me certainly, I think of what the scene is about and the optimism that it had. You know, taking possession of the planet on behalf of all mankind, and this was really, you know, sort of this. They're all like these B movies, you know, 1940s, 50s, Low budget kind of stuff, right? We've heard several of those in samples.

So, you know, there's just this unbridled optimism, but this kind of, you know, that's how we felt. We felt that we are reclaiming our role as citizens in the planet and citizens of the galaxy. That you know, Youth of the Galaxy, to quote a Doof track, that we're, you know, unified and we're one and we're part of nature and, you know, that's what we're doing. We're we're reclaiming ownership, not in the sort of literal and certainly not financial sense, but in the sort of more existential sense.

So, yeah, this track just always brings to mind that absolutely incredible event. And so, why don't we give it a listen? All right, here we go with Man With No Name's, Possessed.

Beautiful, simple slide down. All of his sounds are so exquisite, and the pacing, the storytelling, and this like Morse code message. Telling in this Morse code message, that other one drifting off in the distance, just this incredibly optimistic pattern, and then that whoosh. We need way more whooshes now. And then... So you know, it's the notes, the melodic pattern, and the rhythm of all of this just brilliant.

That extra little bit there that one of that other voice that the voices these little riffs seem to come out of other riffs that's magnificent just you know, really exclamatory, celebratory. Haven't said that in a while, right? Beautiful anthem, right? It's really catchy. It's really straightforward. Really has a beautiful hook . Love those sounds.

And again, the interplay between all of the voices—they all sound like voices. And that Upper register, and then this slide is going to come up. Then the answer. Yeah, that four-time repetition. That was the third. And the pace changes a bit.

The storytelling, I mean, really tracks were just so beautifully structured back then, and especially with artists of Martin's caliber. And then, and again, voice-like. Very different on a big system. Just the difference in texture, right, between all of the voices, and they all interplay, whether on different frequencies or sort of a similar range.

They come back to that bassline again. Right, the basslines really held like a signature, really distinctive element for each track, and I think that's sadly something that's not entirely lost today, but it's really faded.

Interesting pause. Interesting pause, that on a higher level, and then there's that one note, exclamatory. It's simultaneously celebratory and uplifting, and a little bit still anguished, like, are are you guys getting the message? Right? Message. Really emphatic.

Pay attention to this wonderful bit here. And then again, the pattern, you know, the shaping, it really mimics, you know, human speech. It really sounds like something's being uttered in a musical language.

Again, we get this wonderful riff building up. Again, again that kind of call and answer patterning that we've seen in a lot of music. And the interplay, very important key change there or chord change. A little bit broody. I'm getting goosebumps.

I mean, getting goosebumps just thinking about that setting, and with all of the magic going on in that tune. I mean, absolutely jaw-dropping. It still absolutely rips any time it's played.

Right, and I've heard Martin play this at ZNA, and you know the crowd absolutely goes ballistic, and it sounds still incredible without new mastering, like as it was done back then on a new system, crystal clear, impeccable engineering.

But the musical content and the, dare I say, spiritual content, right? The energetic, you know, why is this music being made? What's what purpose is it serving, right? And at an event like that, we really felt all of that just aligning and really, you know, coexisting. It was just absolutely magnificent.

So, I thought that this would be, you know, a nice track to end the year on as we head into holiday time. And you know, there's a lot of doom and gloom in the world. And you know, what if we took possession of our lives and we took possession of the world in our way? You know, reclaiming ownership, even amidst all of the forces that, of course, have an impact on us.

And this is something I think that is why this musical scene has spoken so loudly to so many of us. And so I continue to hold out optimism that we can keep dancing Together, in peace and harmony with one another, and as Bill Hicks so beautifully said, explore inner and outer space together.

So, wishing you and yours a happy holiday time, whatever holidays it is you may choose to celebrate or not. And we will be back in early 2026. I'm Mark DJ Solitare wrapping up episode 141 of Retro Goa Explorations and leaving you now with. Hundred and forty-one of Retro Goa Explorations, and leaving you now with Man With No Name's, Possessed. I take possession of this planet on behalf of and for the benefit of all mankind.
