Artist: X-Dream
Song: Telegram
Year: 1998

Hey, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 142 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So this is the first episode of 2026. We are still in the incredible 1997 to 98 season, so roughly from the.

Ninety-seven to ninety-eight season, so roughly from the autumn of nineteen ninety-seven through to the end of the summer of nineteen ninety-eight. It was a really rich period, unbelievable releases, major evolution in how the music was being produced and the styles of music and the artists, established artists evolving their styles, new artists Coming to the fore, so it's been a little bit hard to move on to the 98, 99 season. That will happen soon, but I needed to revisit an a classic, iconic artist album for another track. Now I've already done one kind of from this album, and needed to do another track from this one because It's just it.

I mean, I remember the impression it made, and it's just so incredibly powerful. And this is from X-Dream's Radio, "Telegram". So previously, in another episode, I featured not the mix that was on this album, but an alternate mix that came out on a CD single and a vinyl single as Well, which I prefer, much prefer it. I heard the original mix on DAT at Richard Purple's place in the Tufnell Park DAT Mafia headquarters kind of quadrant that we were all living in at the time, and hated it as I spoke to in that episode.

And then once a year later or so, got this CD single as a promo from Blue Room. I was like, "Whoa, this is what I'm talking about!" This, the structure, storyline, everything—I loved. So I knew the album was coming, and I was living in Japan when it came out. And I remember very specifically having a wonderful day in the park.

It was a national holiday, and I think it was sometime the end of April or The beginning of May, they have a series of national holidays. It's called Golden Week, and I remember spending the day in the park with some friends. It was just very relaxing, and then walking from that Harajuku district down towards Shibuya, and going into the Cisco Techno Shop, which is where everybody bought all their amazing stuff, And seeing, ta da, this masterpiece, and I was like, yoink! Was excited to get my hands on it, and sure enough, I mean, absolutely epic stuff.

Now, something that's interesting here is with artists as varied as X-Dream, similar to Hallucinogen, Total Eclipse and some of our other favorites. They produce a lot of different sounding tracks, and there are any number of album combinations that we could imagine with those, right? I actually drew up once a Hallucinogen 1.5 album, you know, with a bunch of the singles that were released between the first and second albums, and it Would have made you know an amazing flow, and with Xstream, you know all of these tracks are so killer, but they don't represent because it's impossible to the full range of what these incredible artists produce, and so it's a little less melodic some of the content here. So we don't have something like S.T.O.P., Brain Forest Coming Soon would come later, no pun intended, and things like that with a much stronger melodic content.

So there's some really interesting patterning and evolution that's taking place in the tracks that are on this album. I think so. There is some, of course, some wonderful melodic stuff, but this is sort of a shift where we're starting to hear some techno elements, some more Abstract patterning, shaping, where these sounds take on really multidimensional forms when you're in that giant sonic space with the sound being projected in the context of an event. And Telegram certainly is one of these.

Now, in terms of melodic stuff, it's actually on the lower level, right? So they've got their amazing, You know, bass lines and some low riffs, but there's not sort of a an upper level riff to quite the same extent. But it is a masterpiece, absolutely astounding, and with an incredible spoken sample that, of course, relates to the title. Now, this is taken from the same source as As a Child I Could Walk on the Ceiling by The Delta, who Marcus from X-Dream, you know, was involved with, and I've played a little bit of this sample before in the episode devoted to that iconic track, and there's a couple of other ones on this album that include that, including the last one, Out of Your Control.

So let's take a quick peek at the same lady who gave the sample for Radio, and it was the same documentary. Another lady who was able to welcome the ceiling as a child, and you'll hear where the sample comes from. So when all those things are going around in your head, what what is on the outside? I'm talking.

I'm talking a lot, and at a certain point, I start to not become. I've been told, I start To not be easily comprehensible, I'm not incoherent, but it's hard to understand because things are moving so fast in my head that I'm starting to edit like a telegram. Okay, so a pretty, you know, fascinating sample and sort of, you know, these the words chosen really to put you in a certain frame of mind that has to do with the nature of Your consciousness, which is really certainly, I think, a lot of us when we got into the scene back then, that's what this was. It was an exercise in exploration of consciousness and breaking down boundaries and looking at, you know, what is it we normally see, what is it we normally think and conceive and perceive, and how can that change?

And maybe we are already editing, and what happens when you have an unedited version? So very interesting one for sure, but why don't we get started? Really incredible and iconic track by X-Dream, "Telegram". So nice, mysterious, eerie opening.

Just you know, I miss extended mixes in DJ sets. Something I like to do. We just have this pause, and you let people marinate in the sounds. It's sort of this wonderful, atmospheric sort of sea with all these.

There's that harmonic stuff, and then those kind of alien voices. Really sounds like some kind of communication. This little pitch change there. Fascinating upper sound.

And then we're going to have this beautiful, beautiful line come in here. Right, so you have that repeated note bass baseline, but then this Really mystical, broody, atmospheric riff. Not a melody per se. Of course, I mean it is melodic.

Definitely sets a tone, and then the kick. Only 140 BPM. Right, so it really packs more of a punch in Some ways with how attention builds, above that resolution, up to that note. Still ribbons start to come in, upper frequencies.

Such incredible work, always, with what shows up on what frequency level. So here, I mean, it's Was kind of an implied melody, right? With this rhythmic content and how it's shaped. Same with this one, right?

So the previous one predicted this. So you know we have pitch and shaping, but there isn't tone like notes on a keyboard. The creative storytelling. There's some really cool trumpeting going on in the background.

So just sort of some mild notes that are worked into the riffs here to give a little bit of that harmonic richness. Mysterious voices, noises from the darkness. And right now, this has gone on like how many times? So it is totally hypnotic.

Some changes going on in the upper frequencies there. And then, again, thought it was going to break out there, and he just completely lost track of the structure. Absolutely brilliant. Should be on the next cycle.

There we go. Of these sounds, More voices, just coming from the new radio dials. Love the electronic bleeps that are worked in there, the really elegant and refined sounds. that was a game changer That crispness and sharply defined rhythmic element like that.

Nobody was doing that. Together with all of these voices, I mean, this is just really like abstract painting, right? A real, rich, multi-dimensional, sort of sonic landscape. And we get more of those upper frequencies.

Got a Really creative break. Just listen to all of the different, again, all the different frequencies, but also the different voices that are happening simultaneously, and they're all exquisitely textured and layered. And we get that one really smooth legato riff, really mysterious. Oh, interesting development.

Ooh, interesting development here, a little pitch bending, yes you don't know where this is going to head, I mean just really super creative. sounds like dogs barking things are moving so fast in my head that I'm starting to edit like a telegram getting that really Crisp rhythmic bit, just a little bit of that telegram noise, going back into some retro technology there. So you actually only get that telegram note and riff, that kind of sample, for a very brief period. But you get all of the noises of that landscape that really relates to the whole story of needing to add it.

There's some sort of quantum soup of information that we're all swimming in. Mysterious voices. Just incredible shaking. and just the incredible shaping.

Now the texture clears a little bit. Then we have that opening mysterious sound, and then... The telegram comes back. Some more of those atmospheric noises, And then on the CD, it mixes into radio noise, and it was brilliant concept where like switching channels between the tracks.

So I just did a fade out there. That's what I do when I'm DJing, so I don't accidentally get more radio noise than I want. But what a conception! I mean, what I love is you know that the whole storyline has that of the album has that concept, right?

Tuning into these, each track being a kind of different station that you're tuned into for a different transmission, and I mean that's really what the parties felt like. What's wild to me is, you know, I remember specifically, I think it's the that autumn equinox 1995 party that I've talked about how many times, where it really felt like we were downloading these transmissions, And the thing is, you know, there were no downloads back then. In terms of, you know, how we use the term now, we weren't using email. There was no internet that, you know, the general public was using.

Certainly not in my sphere. So, you know, the technology followed and became sort of ubiquitous, based on these actual experiences that we were having with the music and our consciousness. You know about sort of things being beamed down and downloaded, and you know receiving these transmissions, and it was it was it was magical stuff. And so this whole concept for this album is absolutely incredible.

And also, I'll add, I love the way the BPMs shift throughout the album. It's not a progressive progression, right? Like we tend to hear in DJ sets where everything's the Same tempo, or only goes in one direction, in terms of speed. So I think that's really important.

Something I try to do in my DJ sets is switch things up like that as well. Just like you know, your heartbeat will go at different speeds, you know, from one minute to the next, depending on what's going on. So, quite a masterpiece, wouldn't you say? Exquisite engineering, conceptualization, mixing, and storytelling by Rough & Rush, as Marcus and Jan were called in their early releases, and also on this album.

Hats off, gentlemen! Absolute mastery. And I will sign off here and leave you now with X-Dream's masterpiece, Telegram.
