Artist: Juno Reactor
Song: Children Of The Night
Year: 1997

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 143 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. We are still in the approximately 97 to 98 season, so roughly the autumn of ninety-seven through to the summer of ninety-eight. A couple of outliers occasionally. It's you know tracks that I encountered during this period, but which actually were released earlier. This is one that apparently qualifies.

Now I featured a track from this album before, which I only really recall most specifically sort of in the spring of '98, because I was living in Japan at the time, and the atmosphere in that urban landscape, with that, you know, with those vibes, and who I was hanging out with, definitely brings this album to mind. So this is going to be another track from Juno Reactor's masterpiece, "Bible Of Dreams," which apparently was released in the summer of '97. I actually don't remember, believe it or not, when I got it. I don't think it was right at the time then. Don't have the recollection, but I remember listening to this in the car when I was driving around Tokyo at night, roughly April, May '98, with Akira and Chika and some of the other guys from the Solstice team, who I had met in Vancouver, February March beforehand, we all left. I was in London before that. Spent some time in Vancouver, and everybody just left Vancouver and various other places and descended on Tokyo the same spring equinox weekend at the same time, right? I've talked about this before. I think Stéphane Holweck from Total Eclipse, Tsuyoshi Suzuki, and all of the Solstice guys and I all sort of you know reconvened somehow and moved to Japan the same weekend. So we were hanging around quite a lot in the evenings. At times, I could have lived not too far away from where I would end up living, starting in may, and I'm not sure. I think we started hanging around a little bit before that, but we'd sometimes, you know, go into the city, hang around in a park, and so on. And I remember this one evening when we were driving through these construction zones with these, you know, red, you know, illuminated pylons, and you know, just this really cyber futuristic feel. I mean, it was totally Blade Runner, and this was playing in the car, and it was just absolutely mind blowing. So, if I wasn't a hundred percent sold on this album before that, I certainly was then.

Now, Juno Reactor has always been a little bit on the outside, more than just a little bit. They've never been conformists. It's always been pushing the envelope. So, the sound and the style is always beyond any possible parameters or frameworks of what we might term as Goa, right? Certainly, in terms of what we might call psy trance, they've—they certainly got characteristics from that, but the canvas is always really, really big, right? And the landscape there's a wide horizon and landscape and way broader spectrum. And so this album was one of them. And I remember, I mean, it was the weekend, roughly, that I moved to London in '96. It was quite early on, just in that period, in that September of Ninety-six. I remember when the "Feel the Universe" Koxbox Remix had come out, and "Conga Fury" was on CD single, and people didn't know what to make of it because it's just so different, right? And "Conga Fury" is on this album, and when you listen to this album, the whole context, the whole storyline, the way each track goes into one another—I mean, it is like it is just this exquisitely crafted storyline, really a journey. Now the sound here also, it is just beyond what the norm was in production and in palette. Sort of, you know, the the the sonorities that are used is just so completely different from what was being used by others. Now Ben has credited mixing desk got a new mixing desk after the second album beyond the Infinite, and you know you can really hear the difference here. But it's more than that. I mean, it's really you know the sound and the the vision that comes through, right? So we end up with this auditory vision, it's just completely spellbinding.

So you know, I kind of want to do eventually a piece on this whole album because I just think it's such a masterpiece and really, you know, all of the Juno albums. But for tonight, today, or whenever it is that you're watching this, I'd like to feature "Children Of The Night." I think it's a fantastic title. It's a great theme. It is definitely how we felt. You know, reminds me of Doof's Youth of the Galaxy, right? And sort of the way Earthlings are kind of also, you know, these children compared to perhaps more cosmic forces of consciousness. And so these Children Of The Night. You know, this is how we felt when we're going out to these futuristic clubs and outdoor events in the forest, and you know we're you know there in the night, and these kids who are you know exploring the vastness of consciousness through sound and more than that, and I just think it's a fabulous, fabulous track.

Ben has told me that his memory for all of the details is, you know, a bit random. And what he did recall, when I asked about this a little while ago, was that he recorded Michael Schumacher, the famous race car driver, at I think it's Silverstone, sort of the British Grand Prix. And so specifically, you know, when you hear some race car sounds, that's some of what you're hearing. So actual sounds that were recorded of this sort of racing, and I mean this track is just sleek cyber futuristic. Reminds me a lot of Comet, which is the other track I featured in this series from this album, which was used in one of the Matrix movies, and which you know, this one would also qualify. It's absolutely the right kind of cyber futuristic, you know, city from another planet kind of atmosphere.

There's a lot that's going on in this. It's an absolute masterpiece, written of course by Ben Watkins with Mike Maguire, and also credited on Discogs is the great Johann Bley. There's other artists who participated in this album, but the credits, if I'm reading them correctly, and if they are correct on Discogs, it's these three artists primarily as producers of this magical number. So on that note, which is a G flat, by the way, which is the key of this track, why don't we get started listening to the absolute masterpiece by Juno Reactor, Children Of The Night.

Great, similar sound to what we were hearing in, you know, in some of X-Dream in the Radio album. So sort of gonna get a little prediction here. Now this. Okay, so there's that cloudy sound, but this crisp, but atmospheric baseline, and then that kick—the way it sneaks in—with some other bubbling noises and voices. It's really sneaky the way that comes in. Just voices again. These noises from the darkness is a recurring theme. I just love the way that the way that climbs. The percussion, everything, the engineering, the the palette, as I named before. I mean, the the textures, everything is just so exquisite. Completely different level of refinement. Incredibly crisp elements, and we get these voices coming in. It's really, you know, the melodic content here that's sort of embedded in those wispy sounds is a little bit more muted. Now we can hear a little bit more, so it's like it's getting closer and closer. Now You know, it's just this again, this hypnotic loop, right? Getting you in that trance-like state with the repetition. Unbelievable. Futuristic sounds, very sci-fi, and with those those percussive sounds, just completely different. And then this, that little little grace note on there, just adds that little inflection. Really incredible shaping and a lot of content. Just listen to the blend of sonorities here. Just notice that other circular a little riff underneath the surface there. Notice how the bass line here is a little crisper. You can sort of hear the tonal shifts there. Then, now it's more legato and deeper. It's a lot smoother and darker. Same content. There's that crackling of excitement in there. Don't know if you can hear the police sirens in the background while I'm filming this, but that kind of fits with the theme here. And this, the way these notes ascend. You know, and you get all this content that you've heard before, but everything is just reframed in this incredible storyline. Sam. Sample. This is just like this, just the way this catches. Then you have the knife, then the call. Then you have that sample. Then you get a little bit of a break, right? This little break, beady, but not quite, and it's well beyond that, especially with the the reverberant lower register, and also super cyber here with the way these you know these smooth sounds interplay. I you can still get that undulation of that bassline. You get that wonderful little evocative riff with that grace note. Just you can never predict what's coming, so it's so brilliant about this kind of track from back in the day. And that crackling sound. I think we've got the final explosive section coming up now. Brilliant drumroll. Extra layer, some extra chugger chugger. And all these, again, otherworldly sounds. And this is a beautiful CD where things, you know, really blended beautifully from one to the next. Wow, what a masterpiece!

I mean, this is just a whole other level of music, right? Um, it's interesting, right? I mean, it's made just like it's electronic music. Um doesn't sound digital per se right still got this very organic quality but you know with all of those different synths but with the with this particular refined sounds it just sounds so otherworldly it doesn't even sound like you know select you know terrestrial rather um synthesizers and it really, just sounds like you know you've got pure sound and this storyline. You know, each line, of course, carrying its message, and then the interplay between them. I mean, this is just music that's beyond music. Absolutely, another dimension. Incredible storytelling, amazing content, absolutely evocative.

And you know, for me, just the memory of driving around, you know, Tokyo at this very exciting time in my life and in the scene, with the evolution of this music, and you know, as we're approaching, you know, in 1998, we're approaching 1999 and 2000, and you know, it was just really this feeling, this wave of, you know, this movement. And then, you know, soon after, a few months later, Juno Reactor would be at that unbelievable Equinox Strong Sun Moon Festival. About a year after the album came out, so in July, you know that party was July '98, and I mean that was a morning to remember. As much as I don't remember everything per se, like I usually do, but remember, remember that Juno morning, and but this is really this nighttime futuristic. You know, this is for me like just the epitome of a 2:30 to 4:00 a.m. kind of track. You know, the darkest part of the night, absolute magic.

So I'm gonna sign off here and leave you with the whole track without my commentary, so you can listen to all of the sonic splendors in its magnificence.
