Artist: Space Tribe
Song: So Deep
Year: 1999

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 146 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So we have moved on, as of the previous episode, into the 98, 99 seasons. So tracks that I first came across, or that were released in the from the autumn of '98 through to the end of the summer of 1999, and this one is on the tail end of that.

This is another track that I heard Olli Wisdom play at Solipse, which effectively became, in a sense, it was the first Ozora because it was on the site where the current Ozora festival takes place. Much smaller and much more, you know, didn't have the infrastructure, which is incredible now. And it was a whole other, of course, story back then. It was pretty big and pretty amazing. And you know, I've talked how many times about Olli's influence on me and how, you know, any time I could be in a position to hear him play. I was there, and so I was at the whole festival. I got sick for one night and missed an entire day, so I missed X-Dream and Mark Allen and all of that. And I think that was right before you know the day before Olli's set, and I was like absolutely determined to be there.

He's playing a four-hour set, and you know his preference was you know doing the full shamanic thing, and he used to do that a lot in the early years, where he played the entire party, so he could really, really shape. I mean, he'd spent a lot of time on the dance floor and experienced all of those states, you know, in terms of where it is that what works with the light at what time and what phase of your journey, and so on. But you know, as festivals and other kinds of events started becoming more the norm, he started working into you know the four-hour time slot, which was still not that unusual at the time. I mean, two hours was a minimum; quite often, two and a half or three. So four was a little bit longer, but not absolutely unheard of. Whereas nowadays, you know, these one-hour sets and one and a half hours, or even an hour, fifteen minutes—like, you know, what are you supposed to do? So, in any case, I was determined to be there.

Olli was there in his full power, like silver alien body suit—you know, full ET gear, not the you know bright traditional fluoro Space Tribe stuff, but you know, definitely that sleek alien spacewear kind of thing. And of course, I was, you know, was a little bit backstage or on the stage, and mostly on the dance floor because I wanted to experience it. A couple of the few times I came on stage was, you know, I'm always leery about, you know, when somebody major is playing, asking when anybody's playing really, asking what a certain track was. So I always minimize that unless it's like, oh my god, you know, I absolutely need to know what this is. And you know, I knew him, but not as well, of course, as I would in later years.

And so this track comes on. It was just all these bleeps and amazing sounds and of course a super quirky, fun and quite spiritual sample. And this is the one where he's like, "Oh my gosh, what is this?" And he's like, "It's one of mine." This was So Deep. A Space Tribe track that came out on an album that year, so it might have been released a little bit later, but it was in August '99 that I first heard it on Spirit Zone. So Space Tribe was releasing all of their albums on Spirit Zone, and he was, you know, he was putting out an album a year. He was being really prolific at this point, and a few, you know, different styles. But he was, you know, there was a lot of light, textured, and playful, and you know, stuff with, you know, some good old screechy, you know, Australian wildlife kind of sounds since he was living in Australia at the time, but this one had a lot of those bleeps and blops and all kinds of fun sounds, and I mean just really made for grooving, you know, really like lower body, upper body, consciousness, emotion, the whole thing. So it's a really really fun one.

It's got a great spoken sample, which is taken from a movie that you know I won't mention, but you know high sort of high ticket kind of animated kids movie, and it's just really really cool. So good to include there. You know, I mean everybody did these things just without, you know, there was no checking. Oh, is it okay to include this? And a lot of the times, it was like way, way, way older stuff, as we've seen in some of these videos. You know, with nineteen forties and fifties B movie, you know, schlock that nobody could even remember. But you know, this one was a little bit more, a bit more out there, in the sense of major studio movie, but very entertaining, absolutely perfect for the psychedelic experience, for really sort of putting things in context, and just a fun super psychedelic track.

So I'll put it on. We'll listen together, and then I'll let you Hear it afterwards without any commentary. So let's listen to "So Deep" by Space Tribe.

Okay, so you get those bleeps and then that you can feel that pulse with a kick and that voice-like chorus line, and then now listen to the percussive stuff here because it really takes on some shaping, right? Just the the movements there become something that implies melody. That harmonic shift there is amazing. Great effects. Then we get those real zappy laser zap things, and again, you know, in a big system, that's going to sound really, really different. And again, now there's a little bit more follow through with some of these riffs from the previous part, and that chorus comes back. I mean, just really natural storytelling and pacing. Man, really creative break and shift. Really fun lower riff there. Really nice bounce , a lot of notes moving around, not just a one-note chug-a-chug-a thing, which can work. And then there's this, there's this kind of build that's happening over here. Really wonderful. Again, the percussive stuff, some extra voices. Love the way that just fades in. This comes more to the foreground. Then listen to the shaping here. Again, like a call and answer. Brilliant. Again, I love the step in that bassline. So all these different textures, right, and riffs, and they're all just really helps you sort of tune into All the different things that can be happening all at once. Got some cool, gnarly affirmative riff there. Then it's more of those laser zaps. Let's get up on the next one. There we go. Wow, a little bit on the offbeat. Groovy rhythm.

What if, like, we're just tiny little things, and we're just like part of this whole other huge universe that's like so big we don't even know it exists. Man, that is So Deep. So I mean, what a psychedelic mindset, kind of quote that is just brilliant.

So again, more of that, just that build and this, you know, these. It's just these riffs repeating that really take on this mantra-like effect. Go through these really slight changes and. So write stuff that goes up and down, stuff that has texture and it has pitch without having the notes assignment on a scale. A little bit more tension with that repetition there. Voicing is quite different. Right, and then we're right back at the beginning with that. And then just notice how like not as many things present at this point right so all this incredible storytelling just really really organic back to the lasers apps right, so now it continues through instead of just being little short chunks of that riff. Really love this effect. I mean, this is like something I've talked about before, where it's like this Greek chorus that's sort of standing behind and pronouncing something. Love that kick effect. The percussive stuff continues.

Right, so just again, you know, all of these shifts, none of the breaks are stops or interruptions in the musical content. It's all part of the journey, and you really feel, okay, okay, we've done a few of those, and now we're going to start heading towards the the conclusion with some new content here. Love that sound. Okay, so we're getting into the final section here, and then now, now we're gonna get some really really cool riff here. So it's it's a little bit more atonal, playing around with the harmonies here. And then. Then, just all of that completely Wild, we're in a computer. All my circuits are firing, kind of thing.

Then, like we're just tiny little things, and we're just like part of this whole other huge universe that's like so big we don't even know exists. Man, that is So Deep. I mean, jaw-dropper! So fun and quirky and deep, and you know, psychedelic. It's uplifting. It's got some mysterious stuff, but it's got so many amazing sounds. You know, I really love all the bleepy stuff, the laser zaps, all of that textured, percussive kind of stuff. Harmonically, all of the different riffs, and the way there was that sort of really interesting harmonic sort of doubling up of that of that riff at the end there, and then just those wild, crazy bleeps that just completely throw you off.

And in fact, when he played this at ZNA in 2022, I made sure to include three tracks of Olli's. I wanted to do kind of a tribute thing. We had both been supposed to play at ZNA in 2021, and he actually died on the day that we had been going to play. And the promoter told me he was going to put us one before the other. It was going to be set up that way. So I, of course, was going to include Space Tribe tracks in my set, and started off with Geo-Matrix. Later on, I had Star Travellers, and then I had this one. At a really, really key energy point, going into the extended mix of Ring of Fire, and those bleeps threw me off so much. Like I missed the cue point, and so I, I knew when I was going to put it, and I had it all lined up when I was going to hit the cue, and it just went off, and then it just kept on like jumping around, trying to get it like really back on the beat that I wanted it at, and those bleeps were completely throwing me off, and I could just feel Olli kind of like you know poking at me and sort of having a little bit of fun there. You know, wasn't any, there was nothing, there was no emergency. You know, it still came on. It was just a little bit of a longer extension into the track than I wanted, but it was it was kind of funny, and it was like, wow, those bleeps really do something.

So anyway, a super duper fun track, which you know I have very fond memories of having heard. You know, it was only the fourth time that I'd heard Olli play, and it was the last time for a while. It was like about five years later that he came to Canada for the first time. So there we go. I'm going to sign off here and leave you now with the full track so you can listen to it without commentary and enjoy all of that psychedelic mayhem.
