Artist: C.O.P. (Children Of Paradise)
Song: Bloodsuckers
Year: 1999

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 149 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So amazing that we can get to episode 149, and it's the first time to share a track by a certain project. But of course, it also makes sense since I'm working relatively chronologically with these projects, and new projects were coming, you know, coming into the scene.

Although this is one that I had heard of, I think, in '97, with their first track that circulated on DAT, popular one amongst DAT. On debt, popular one amongst debt trading circles for sure, because it is a real killer. But that's not the one I'm featuring. So, little background story: as I talk about a project whose only album came out in 1999, which is part of the, you know, the scope that we're looking at at this current phase in this series, from the you know the latter part of '98 through to the summer of '99, and this is Children of Paradise, known as C.O.P., a phenomenal project made up of one half of X-Dream, Jan Müller, and the three members of a French project Gangguru, who was really well known in the music trading circles because they didn't release a whole lot of music, but they produced a ton. So three musicians there: Phil Weiss, Pierre Branet, and Willy Boutron.

And so in '97, from '97 to '99, Jan was from Extreme, was spending quite a bit of time in Paris and was looking to make music. And he was introduced to the Gangguru guys by Chris Novaks, and so the first track that they made is the one that I remember very clearly getting on DAT and that everybody loved, "Fairy in the Dragonforest." And everyone's like, "Who is this?" Right? Because not everybody knew who the music was, but we could tell this is top notch, and you know, for top notch musicians with that you know, extreme punch that we were all used to and loving back then.

Now, the name of the project I should highlight is named after Marcel Carné's 1945 movie Les Enfants du Paradis, which is Children of Paradise. So I had a couple of other tracks from them before this album came out. One of them, at least I'll feature, and I'll probably you know go back in time even more than I am now from our current trajectory, and probably do ferrying the dragon forest. But when this showed up, I remember as the first part of '99, I had a few of the tracks from here already, but it was a revelation because really we're talking like top-notch production, and also just the the sonic framework of this stuff is just absolutely incredible. You know, as we expect from extreme.

And if you listen to Gangguru, which you know you do now that three CDs of unpublished material made it onto the DAT label. I mean, incredible stuff, and there's more. I mean, they were really prolific and super creative musicians. So you know, you get these four musical minds in a studio together at this heyday of, you know, of the trance scene, and some amazing stuff happened. So everything that I've heard is absolutely killer, and I really remember the impression that this particular track on the CD made instantly from the first notes and the atmosphere and musical and melodic content, especially, and this is "Bloodsuckers." Interesting title. I didn't find out, you know, any inspiration, but I can tell you that you know, at this point in the scene, I was beginning to see, you know, there's a little bit of some energy vampire kind of stuff going on. It was a bit disappointing, and so you know, you talk about somebody who drains your energy as being a bloodsucker. So whether this is the case or not doesn't matter. You know, not everybody pays too much attention to the titles, but I'll tell you, as a track, this is jaw-dropping. It is 10 minutes long, and it is phenomenal in every way. So you know, I'll have lots that I can say as we're listening to it. So we should probably just get started with that.

So let's listen now. to the phenomenal track, incredible production and musical content by Children of Paradise, Bloodsuckers. Okay, I mean, just this, the the relationship between these notes, and that bass line coming in. Well, right now it's still just those two, and then it's going to expand. I mean, what is that? So it's like this clarion call, right? So now we had an extra note added there. Then there's three notes. And there's three notes. I mean, just these tone relationships, right? Absolutely, magic. And then that bassline, full power, right? So all these different frequency levels filling in, and then the kick comes in there a little ahead of schedule, it seems. And those sort of airbrushy kind of little aerated hi-hat-simulating sounds. And there's that. Listen to the rhythm of it as well as the sound. And it's just. It's just absolutely hypnotic, right? I mean, the notes that they choose, and then just that repetition. So really trance-inducing.

Like, how many times has this gone on? Some of those voices. Oh, now there's a change. Like an extra beat there as well before the break. Non-stop chugga-chugga. That non-stop chugga-chugga, and again, just that simple one-note mantra, like, what the heck is that? Like a helicopter about to take off, and again, everything sounds like voices, right? I'm just listening to all the stuff that's going on, and then this really unbelievable unbelievable riff, and there's going to be something incredible coming in above this. I mean, this is just like a whole other musical dimension.

Oh, little break while that regular rhythm continues and these other. Well not yet you never know when the break is going to come this is what was so exciting about the music then you think you can't get any higher and then you do. And again, it's all voices. It almost sounds like rap it's absolutely incredible and that extra rhythmic bit that just came in. Now there's this very important voice coming in that's really got a lot of anguish and lament. Beautiful intervals. And all the different sounds, can we get that one again? And on a big system. And on a big system, so there's more dramatic exclamation happening. Really driving the point home. Just I guess another line came in in the background again that we'd heard before. Some extra little upper frequency stuff there. That. Amazing. Just keeps going. Still. Still. Very cool.

We get that kind of again groovy chug-a-chug-a rhythm happening. Hmm, little shift in the chugga rhythm, little shift in direction after all the deep anguish stuff that came before, and there's more of everything coming, and again that chug, crunchy little voice voice is getting a bit louder now. Another little bit came in there. Very interesting pause here. Talk about just clearing space. Some of the subtle stuff going on in the background it's a little undulating. Oh, that baseline kicks in. Wow so again just the way that mantra repeats and then the kick comes in and it repeats is just really you know getting that message through. Notice that other sort of little granular sound in there, and then we're back to this bit, the one of just that one little mantra thing with the voices behind. These unbelievable sounds, just the shaping and the way it just sounds like this conversation, a really alien transmission, and really sounds like a whole other sound world.

And then it's done. I mean, pretty interesting structure there. I mean, really long these long protracted sections, and then that fascinating, you know, space clearing area, and then you know the way the things come back and forth. The break wasn't as massive in a sense, but in some ways that can really hit harder, right? So there's something to that slight restraint where it's not all you know, big, big drum rolls and kicks and explosions and so on. You know, it it hits through the content. Very surprising ending. Not an easy track to mix in or out of, right? I mean, musically, harmonically, you know, texturally, structurally, in all these ways, it's a pretty unique production, right? Not just talking about engineering production; I'm talking about like the whole, you know, gestalt of this whole thing. Absolutely unbelievable.

I remember that, you know, this. I mean, it's an incredible CD with like a lot of great tracks. I remember Alienation was, of course, you know, really huge. El Niño, I remember on that beforehand, featuring Fairy in the Dragonforest. There, there's a few different mixes of that one, and of course one there, but other ones in some people's grubby little hands, and but this immediately just drew my attention because of this, you know, really otherworldly harmonic language, and as well as the sounds that were being used, being so refined, so creative, and that mantra-like repetition, just very hypnotic. Hadn't heard this in quite a while. You know how things go in terms of you know what we remember and what we listen to regularly and what we go back to. And I was like really glad to go back to this. And you know, into the folder it goes. Who knows when that might show up in a set, but just wonderful to revisit.

Super incredible creation by Children of Paradise, Jan Müller from X-Dream, and the three fellas from Gangguru. So hats off, gentlemen! And I will sign off here and leave you now with the whole track without any commentary.
