Artist: Metal Spark
Song: Technosaur
Year: 1998

Hey there, goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 157 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s goa trance psychedelic dance movement.

So the last couple of episodes we had some tracks that featured some breakbeats, mildly in one case, I think mildly anyway, in a track by Nucleus, where for me the four on the floor and on the the overall you know movement and flavor of the track really felt more like a traditional dance track. And then the last episode before this one was by Joujouka, where it was a lot more overt and where the percussive elements were a bit more crisply defined and I think a little bit more, you know, pronounced.

Now, generally, I've stated, you know, I'm not as much a percussion kind of person, simply because I think when you're dancing, the beat, your body does what the beat is doing, and then you start, so you embody that, and then you start hearing more of what's happening on other levels. So the Kick is not for me generally the thing. Of course, the flavor of the kick is going to impact, you know, things in terms of resonance and the overall vibe, for sure.

Now, the project we're going to listen to today is one I featured before, and with one of the musicians I'd featured even before that. And this is like the first time I ever heard what would be called breakbeats that I liked. And for me, these guys still stand in a league of their own, simply because it doesn't sound like you know. One of my challenges with when things get too beat focused and percussion focused, or it you know that it just becomes too clubby, and then it becomes too terrestrial. When I think you know, the whole concept for me of this music and my whole concept is going beyond what is familiar on this particular plane. We're gonna have a couple of elements that hold us, you know, that are familiar here. And one of the things about a kick is that it's grounding, but I don't really want associations to ordinary life. So I don't want associations to, you know, a nightclub scene.

And one of my issues, in a sense, with some of what our scene has turned into, and in some locations, it's a little bit more pronounced. Is that this is another club scene? This was never the case for me. It was never a club scene, and it was never even a scene. I think as soon as it becomes a scene and you need to be seen, it's a little bit different. You know, I actually used the term perhaps unconsciously. You know, but at the beginning of each episode, talking about this movement, and for me, it always was a movement, and the movement—not just the dance itself being a movement, but it was a social, cultural, and consciousness movement.

And for me, from based on my first experience, and I know that others have had the same or similar experiences. Of course, nobody has exactly the same experience. Was that this is about the beyond? This is about what connects us beyond this planet and what is familiar. And so, you know, I started hearing a lot of breakbeats, and especially when I went back to Vancouver in '96 for a break between Tokyo before moving to London. You know, North America was in a very clubby kind of vibe, and again in '98, and you know it was very club persona, and you go to be seen, and you have your certain dance moves, and you know it wasn't about self expression; it's about you express in a way in order to be seen. And for me, this whole movement was you don't care how you look. I mean, you're gonna pay attention to you know that. I mean, for me, the clothes was about a manner of natural expression, like especially Space Tribe stuff was like you know what is this kind of Signature element: what color and what pattern, and you know how is there this kind of energetic signature?

So when I first heard Lorenzo Zoeter, in his two incredible tracks that I first heard in January '97 on a mixtape that a French DJ had given me to give to Tsuyoshi Suzuki, I was just like, "What the heck is this?" And then I got those tracks on a fantastic compilation, "The Fly" and "Screecher Creature." And then Lorenzo was working in Metal Spark, and we did "Sonic Feet" a little while ago. And Metal Spark was Lorenzo together with Lucas Mees and Patrice van den Berg. And wow, I mean, this is just a whole other story.

So, in a sense, you know, for me, it still has such an otherworldly vibe that the percussion provides a different framework, but it's still so psychedelic that it never devolves. Because I personally consider it a devolution into something clubby, right? It doesn't go into something sceney that I think can so easily happen when things revolve around more around the percussion than around the other elements, and when the other elements also aren't uplifting or outgoing in terms of taking you out to other perspectives and sonic Frameworks, and so you know I've just always loved this these guys' work.

And so Sonic Feet was the first track that I got, I think, from them, and I got that on DAT earlier in '98, and I'm pretty sure it came from Akira Solstice. You know, that's what's coming to mind now again. Go back and see the other episode and see what it is that I said. But I remember later in '98 I got a full album, and it's written in yen over here. But there's no store mentioned here. Just ¥22,280. Way back then, we used to spend money on music quite a bit, and you know, one of the challenges used to be, you know, you're getting concerts, you're getting albums, you don't know what the quality's like. But of course, I knew Metal Spark, and so I knew it was going to be awesome. And sure enough, it is.

And so you know, Kickstart on here, which I love. Metal Detector, amazing, and you know, a whole bunch of incredible stuff. Sonic Feet as a bonus, which for me, I mean, it's just one of the all-time great tracks. And today, we're gonna do the seventh track on the album, Technosaur, which I love as a play on words, right, in terms of dinosaur and techno. And of course, now thirty years later, gonna feel a little bit more like techno sores, and especially when I'm shaking my fist at how things used to be, and sounding like somebody who's maybe feeling extinct, but we are not.

Uh, so you know, this track, of course, is just brilliant. So I'll be highlighting, you know, all of the different features, all the different sound, uh, you know, elements that are brought in here, and listening to it before this filming. Again, you know, I was impressed with the fact that it's, you know, it's still super spacey. It's still super out there, and I just love it.

So I reached out to, reached out to the guys to see if they had any memories, and there were no particular memories about this one. But what Lorenzo said was I could just remember us. I could see us in the studio having fun. Isn't that great? I just think that's lovely because that's what it should be about, right? And so you don't need to have all those specific memories. But you know, this is when the musicians are having a great time, or you know, when they're focused together, or they're really inspired together, or they're what, whatever. You know, there's that collective experience, and there's that camaraderie and that working together, I think there's just something that works its way into the fabric of the music that we get to experience as well.

And you know, for me, this is fun. And you know, I take my music very seriously, in case you didn't notice, and the message seriously. And I think it's of course important to have fun. And you know, also, you know, my feng shui training, yin and yang, you know, opposites working together harmoniously, the fun stuff. There's still a level of you know grounded and connected and so on without just being you know completely you know off the rails, which of course is another thing that can happen. But I digress as I often do.

We will listen now to this wonderful, fun, quirky, energetic, weird, lovely, spacey track by Metal Spark, “Technosaur”.

Now these sounds, these bleepy sounds—I mean, you know—they're commonly used now. They were, you know, coming more and more to the fore just around this time. And this lead-in, love the way that leads into this repeated pattern, which again, you know, repetition helps to create that trance-like effect. Another lead in here. That brings in the kick. Right, so it's still got a solid kick, right? So breaks are not the only thing that are going to come into this. Some very cool upper frequency sounds, and now the kick structure shifts. Now this is still so alien, right? So if you start to imagine this is voices and on a bigger system and in the right space and setting, and set, you know, that's what it's going to feel like.

And then this familiar lead-in again. And there's this dimensionality where it seems like the voices are shooting out at you, and like laser zaps. That these bleepy zappy things, right, which would be very Koxbox and other kind of projects like that, right, really deepens and otherworldlyizes the proceedings. And I love that rhythmic, the propulsion of some of these riffs. And this sounds really free and funky and groovy. And groovy, super cool, light, clear textures here too. Very cool and playful. You know the shaping really helps with that uplift. That that element there. Fabulous. How many things are happening at the same time? Amazing emphasis. Ooh, a cool little delay on that one. Wow. Cool that the kicks dropped out. Phenomenal.

And this reverberation. This reverberation going on goes so beautifully with those bleeps added back in. So you know that kind of squelchy stuff has been used by so many since that it's kind of you know people can now think of it as a bit less than, then, but it's still fantastic stuff when it's presented with the right musical content and is serving the effect. Amazing, amazing reverb echoing going on here. And again, that lead in, seamless the way it entered into this riff. Amazing declining here. I love the way this goes back on a lot more regularly, and again, and again, then a break.

And when the kick drops out, it's for a reason, right? It lets you catch your breath, but the same musical content continues and deepening as an organic storyline. Line it's not a real it's not an interruption very clever behind the scenes lower mid stuff going on here and then this reverb too I love the way that's accented as well I mean, wow, absolute genius, right? I mean, that's not about the beats. The beats are there, and it's not about the beats.

And this is the thing that's really key, right? It's a feature. It's not the feature. It's a characteristic, and it provides texture. It provides rhythm. It provides something that's serving a purpose, and not just we're just putting it here, right? And so, I mean, the whole musical concept here is still like take somebody to another level and take somebody outside of the Norm.

So when I speak about things, you know, not being clubby, of course we went to clubs, and of course we still go to clubs because those are the places that you know we can go and congregate. There's a sound system, and you can do all of these things. But is you know how do you get the club to transcend the club scene? And that's for me what the potential of these events always was. You know, I went somewhere, and it just completely went beyond. You know the experience in Tokyo in the nineties really was next level, and I think probably spoiled me because it gave me a taste of what the potential here is. Where you had people from all countries, of a whole range of ages, because there's people in their twenties, thirties, forties, fifties, and beyond, from you know international. So it's this whole microcosm of you know terrestrial people that Connecting to, you know, what's beyond. How do we all get along, and how do we break down all of these barriers?

And so, you know, any scene that becomes too defined, loses that expansiveness. And so that's some of what I mentioned last week that Tsuyoshi Suzuki was on about, you know, when he was like trying to sort of break down the barriers of goa trance, and you know, and a lot of folks really didn't like the term goa trance. And now, you know, you have a lot of people who don't like the term psy trance and psychedelic trance, and they look down on the music. Of course, as soon as they hear the name, you know, and that especially in the mainstream club scene, and then you get big name DJs who will drop psy trance tracks in their sets, and everybody loves it because they don't know that's what it is. You know, I've always thought our scene is the music that people want to hear. They might just not know it yet, and they might need the right experience. First experience is not always, you know, it's that different. It can be a little surprising, but but in any case, you know, talking about clubs, you know, my main thing was about the club being able to, in a sense, transcend its location in the same way that we, as humans, transcend our current location and embodiment into something beyond.

And so, you know, when it came to breaks in terms of the percussive kind, nobody ever outdid, to my knowledge, and certainly my experience, Metal Spark and Lorenzo's earlier projects, Sibilant, and whoever was in that sort of realm. It's just absolutely phenomenal the way it's just seamlessly fuses the best of psychedelic electronic music and is so completely entrancing. So, bravo, gents! Another wonderful one.

I will sign off here and leave you with the entire track without commentary, so you can really enjoy its interdimensional splendor.
