Artist: The Delta
Song: Thing
Year: 1998

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 158 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So we're currently exploring tracks that, by and large, were released sometime from the autumn of '98 through to the end of the summer '99, or produced at that time, or that I got my hands on during that time, and this one has a little bit of a little stretch on either side of those parameters because I know that it was premiered in the summer of '98 and only released in early 2000. And when I got my hands on it, might have been late '99, might have been early 2000, but I know that I first played it out in sometime early spring in 2000, and it made quite an impact on its premiere in '98, and it certainly made an impact when I played it out. And it just came up in conversation recently, the the premiere did so. I figured I might as well feature this one.

It's been a little while since I've had this artist on here, and it's a legendary one, and it's a pretty iconic track. So you'll recall, or you'll go back and find the videos, and then you'll hear that you know I was not immediately enamored with The Delta when I first heard “As a Child I Could Walk on the Ceiling”, and then of course, I came to love it, and then I was massively searching for “Travelling at the Speed of Thought”. When I heard, after I heard Steph play it in Osaka in November of '97, and he had just showed me the DAT that just said Delta, I was like, "What's this Delta track?" And I remember later in '98, at some point, I met up with Mark Allen. I think it was possibly a Return to the Source party in Japan. That was probably it, not the one at Mount Fuji that I've talked about. But there were a couple of later ones that were done with Rainbow Two Thousand, A.K.A. Raincoat Two Thousand, because again, I do remember this particular one being a rainy occasion, as they all were, and I remember him saying, "Oh, Spiralkinda opened up at the VooV Experience with this unbelievable The Delta track. You'd love it. It started off. It was like operatic and had this chorus, and just you know, was all this all this noise and the slow, you know, long introduction, and then the place just exploded. Because I remember Mark had remembered. I was asking him about this Delta track when I was looking for traveling at the speed of thought. He thought I meant the “Stranded” remix. I was like, no, no, no! There's another one. So he remembered that, told me the story, and then I got the CD. Again, might have been prior to release, might have been just after, in the mail after I'd moved to Vancouver. I'd moved in October Ninety nine. After a little bit of time in Europe in the summer, and I remember, of course, I was like, "Oh my God, Delta album!" Right now, there's a range of styles because they were starting to shift directions here. But I was like, "Oh, I hope that orchestral track is on there," and sure enough, it is. So I recognized right away, what this was, and I remember it might have been my first set in Vancouver after moving here. Might have been maybe it was the second one. So, whenever that was, I remember it was in the spring. I just remember because of who was there and when I met them and so on. It's you know all these associations.

And when I Put it on every DJ in the club, and in Vancouver we tend to have a high percentage of DJ relative to the dancers. So everybody would show up at the gigs back then, and everyone was coming up to me saying, "What is this track?" And I mean, it made quite an impression, and rightly so. I mean, it is pretty full power. There was nothing like it at the time that had this level of actual operatic sonority to it. Even though, as I'll explain, it's not from an opera. It is from another choral work. I've got a sample for us to check out afterwards, but we're going to listen to the track first. But in any case, I just remember being Completely enamored with it, even though it's got like a lot of darker stuff. It goes in a lot of different directions. So you know, this is the brilliant thing with a lot of artists is they're able to do different styles. And so, you know, you're going to hear shards of as a child, but it's different. It's also a little bit of is there something from traveling, but it's really different. So this gets really dark and gritty and gnarly and quite eerie. So buckle up. There's some really cool stuff coming up over here. We are going to listen to "“Thing” by The Delta."

Okay. So timpani. That's that's the big kettle drums, and then this orchestral Introduction. I mean, imagine opening a whole festival like with this sound. Okay, so that sounds more. That is not operatic. That sounds more like from Psycho or some kind of scary movie. I'm not sure where this is taken from. As well as that weird scraping, with like these cries. Very dramatic, right? Now this is coming from the Fauré Requiem. Which we'll hear later. What truly beautiful piece of music, but it's church music. Then that's from something else or inspired by it. And that's pizzicato is when they pluck the strings on Stringed instruments, very eerie effect. And then notice there's that the drum. So timpani is the kettle drum, those really, really big ones, the back of the orchestra. Then there's the bass line. There's the kick. Beautiful voice, super smooth this kick that's in there. Very cool note progressions here with that brass sound from the Fauré Requiem. Fauré is the French composer who wrote it.

Alright, so so far it's quite subdued, and that'll change. Hey, so talk about that crisp, biting percussion on that upper level, and then that full power kick. Wow! All kinds of eerie sounds coming in with it. Interesting climb going on in the background. That voice. Very The Twilight Zone, all kinds of ghoulish cries. This is getting pretty dark here, yeah. Very cool upper elements that are in there now. Notice the notice the rhythm there. Right, so pretty minimal, other than those orchestral interjections, so pretty techno, pretty grungy, and this was a sound that was starting to be a little bit more of this around this time. Listen to the beauty, you know, you really have yin and yang. Ooh, and then this chord, this progression. Ooh, notice that. Oh, different note. Really beautiful, and then that again. And that again.

Long, dramatic breaks, huh? I mean, just imagine this outdoors. I mean, this is really what this music is made for. Or, actually, I mean, giant stadium. That giant stadium outdoors would be something too. Oh, I mean, this is really like I don't know this energy leading into some cosmic birth or rebirth. I mean, this is really intense. It's interesting the way all those sounds blend into that. Very cool rhythmic bit here. New sound. So right now, these two notes. This is unresolved, right? So it's waiting for something to happen. Whoa! Sounds like a voice backwards. Very David Lynch, Twin Peaks kind of thing. Oh, some extra impulse added with that sound. More scraping going on. Interesting harmonic stuff going on in the background. It's getting louder and louder. This sounds like it's you know something really angelic coming out of all this darkness. We're back to that opening bit from the Fauré Requiem. We're And you're just lost in this hypnotic loop here. There's that kettle drum that sort of breaks the kick. All kinds of very trippy noises. I mean that is just again it's a whole other kind of piece, isn't it?

You know, so as I was saying, this was coming at a time when there was starting to become, you know, there's starting to be a lot more dark and minimal stuff that was working its way into sets, and I think it all has a place when it's well incorporated and when it's well balanced. The issue that I was starting to see is, you know, dark is magnetic, and people would just, you know, play dark and then darker and more and more. And there wasn't a sense of, you know, as the tracks—not this one, but other tracks—started being composed, there started being less of an integration and a balance of light and dark. And then DJs as well were just sort of sticking to one flavor, and so we were getting a lot of just you know some of those minimal techno-like elements that we heard in this set that weren't complemented and balanced by some of the other elements that provide more light and provide more lyricism and so on. And so you know it was it was a bit of an interesting and kind of tricky time in terms of how things were starting to move.

But of course, I mean, this was 1998, right? So this was actually done in '98 and was released about a year and a half later, right? So it would have been fresh, probably off the press when Spiralkinda—I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing it in English or German—was Spiral Kinder. Spiralkinda played it in, you know, at the legendary VooV Experience in the summer of '98. That was confirmed for me. That was it was '98, not '99, when it was played, and you know I know for sure this album was released. You know I was back in Vancouver when this was coming out, so that was you know late '99, early 2000, and the official release date, well, I mean release month, is showing as January 2000 on Discogs.

I just wanted to play a quick little bit from the operatic sort of one of the samples, and as I said, it's not operatic; it's church music. So it's a requiem, which is a series of pieces for the dead that would be played in a church. A lot of composers wrote requiems. Mozart wrote one. Brahms wrote one. And Fauré, a nineteenth into the twentieth century French composer, wrote exquisitely beautiful music. He wrote one, and we're going to hear a little bit from the opening, where we you might recognize some of the sounds that we heard in there. Right. So that particular combination of notes with the brass, and then this particular choral sample. O night, when Christ was born, O night, when Christ was born. Okay, so the progression of notes is different, right? So they did some stuff when they were sampling and using other orchestral samples, and so you don't hear the full, you know, progression of chords that Fauré incorporated. It can recognize the opening, can recognize the voices, and some of those other samples that were then Adjusted and mixed in with others.

So, anyway, struck me right away because, of course, you know, being a classical geek, I know the Requiem. Great piece of music, and certainly great piece of music. This thing, isn't it? Again, very different, really cutting edge. And certainly, when you think of you know how fast the music was progressing, the fact that this really came to the public in early 2000, but had already been produced in the middle of 98, right? Which is really just when “Travelling at the Speed of Thought” was coming public. Although it had been available some months before to those who had it, it's pretty astounding what cutting edge stuff. Of course, you know we're used to that from some of these great musicians, and so, so there we are.

So I am going to sign off and let you listen to the entire magical, weird, twisted, bizarre track that we just heard together. I am Mark DJ Solitare wrapping up episode 158 and leaving you now with a truly cutting-edge masterpiece by The Delta, “Thing”. Thank you for watching, and I'll see you next time.
