Artist: Astronomikx
Song: After Life
Year: 1999

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 163 of Retro Goa Explorations, my series in which I present in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So we are currently in the '98 to '99 season, at least I think we are, and this is a track that I was actually a bit hazy about when I got it, and I had to check. It was released on a Flying Rhino compilation in March '99. Now the music was really changing at this time, and so I was finding it actually quite challenging to find stuff that really appealed to me. And so quite often, you know, I would get compilations, and you know, maybe one or two tracks would appeal to me. Maybe none of them. But this is one that sure did, and it's a powerful, deep, twisted nighttime stormer that I just adore, and I immediately took to it.

And the extra fun bit, and to do with this, is it was probably at least ten years later, if not more, that I discovered that I knew the artists who made it quite well, in fact. So this is a track by Astronomikx called "After Life" that was released on Fourth Flight: Velocity, in March '99. So I do remember playing this track in in my sets in Japan when I was there in the '98 to '99 season, I was just pretty hazy about when I actually got this one. You know, my sets sort of the later part of '98. I was playing a little less regularly, a bit more underground, and you know, I mean, some of when some of these tracks came to me, you know, I've really got you know, there was this one club I used to play at in a fun regular ongoing party actually in it just started building up sort of towards the end of ninety eight into ninety nine and I just couldn't remember I was like oh did I play this at this party or that party so I know all of you are just amazed generally that I can remember any of these things but in any case this one I was unclear of whether it was you know, before this break that I took at the early, you know, January went, came back to Canada for a bit, and then back to Japan, and I couldn't remember if it was before or after that, and it was after. So it was March '99.

Sam Elcox is one of the producers of this track, and that's his project, Astronomikx. And the other member at the time, who was making some of the tracks with him, was Harry Kanellopoulos. If I'm pronouncing it properly, it's all Greek to me. So I knew both of them because Sam and Richard Purple lived together in my neighborhood of Tufnell Park in London, and that is where I met Harry also. And Harry was this Phenomenal DJ, and he and I just hit it off absolutely brilliantly. We played at a couple of house parties together in London in the summer of '97. I think possibly also a small outdoor one, but fabulous DJ, really you know big real sense of style and you know big sort of the big storytelling kind of thing.

And so you know, I was playing this track for quite a while because it was one of these, you know, I think it really fits with a certain style of nighttime track. And I really don't remember. It was in the late, you know, first decade of the 2000s or in the 2010s that I found out that this track was by Sam. I mean, it just absolutely blew my mind because you know, I used to see Sam all the time at his place, and he had this you know giant mixing desk, you know, in this house studio, and would go over. But he was always working on stuff, and I'm not sure that I ever heard finished tracks at the time, you know. So he always had things on the go. Super nice guy and friendly, but you know, Richard and I, you know, spent a lot of time up in that sort of room of his, listening to you know, discovering “As a Child I Could Walk on the Ceiling” and Promethean Process, you know, “Clarity From Deep Fog” and so on. Stories that I've told before.

So, so there we go. So this is just a fabulous track. Absolutely love it. It was you know, again, it was a real favorite at the time. And so let's give it a listen. It's been quite a while since I listened to this one, so you know I've listened a few times before filming, and I'm looking forward to rediscovering some fabulous things in this track. So here we go. After Life by Astronomikx.

So nice, eerie beginning. Love those those sounds that are just little—I don't know what to call them actually. I mean, they're not really bleeps, but they're pretty cool, murmuring sounds. Notice that rapid fire and the kick just coming in. Nice smooth intro to the kick, right? Rather than it just coming in at full volume. And so, you know, this is one of these tracks that's, you know, quite abstract at this point. Always been a major part of Goa stuff, right? Where it really sounds quite computerized. So some of those cool little woodblock sounds remind me of Process’s “X-1”, and so on. That steady sort of X-Dream-style, sixteenth-note bass. Love this. Love this.

So, and again, you know, one of the fascinating things here is it's dark, and there's some uplifting stuff. I say right as that super dark sound comes in. You know, it's that yin and yang balance. There's always some contrast going on. Love that long squelchy sound. And just this, you know, simple no change, and then back to the main key. This, remember, I always loved this. You know, so another thing that's great here is you know, you have these long legato, you know, those smooth lyrical lines, along with stuff that's chopped up. So again, there's that yin yang balance. It's not all the same kind of thing going on at the same time.

Some interesting voices. I really think this kind of stuff is, this is just a really important part of the nighttime time journey. Really key riff here. Notice the patterning here. And then back to the top. Sounds like a few different things I mean it's uh just you know I get really you know sort of imagine the setting of this kind of thing you know like this it could be the spaceship kind of you know revving its engines but also um a lot of these things just sound like some kind of communication, like these voices, like the, like the inflection of this melodic riff, very voice-like. Ooh, a little pause in the proceedings here. So they're just sort of here at this point wondering, what's going on? Then you're back in this whole other dimension. There's that hi-hat there, and that more squelchy voices. And these shapes are really beautifully planned. Wow, just love this abstract kind of extraterrestrial outer space noise. Very catchy. Very catchy little hook, that riff. Wonderful build up here.

So again, you know that blend of moods. There's this expansive, you know, almost uplifting quality, yet it's got that very dark flavor. And that hook, just repeating. It's got a great rhythm to it as well. It gives it, you know, so the shaping and the rhythm make it really catchy. Then, and end with a little bit of math. Um, goodness me, quite a high power track with a lot of content going on over there.

And as I was saying, I mean, you know, I think there's a lot of talk about you know what's Goa, what's the Goa sound, and what's Goa, you know, trance. And as I've named before, you know, quite a few people, you know, didn't like the term Goa trance to begin with, and you know what started happening was as things started getting locked down in terms of you know these are the styles that are around you know that this is what qualifies as Goa trance. When you know the scene was always open and you know there was no “Goa”; the stuff that people first started playing there was not Goa trance, but it became perceived as Goa trance, and it was just music that was played, and that was then being made for these parties. When this kind of kind of quantum shift took place around ninety three, ninety four, and so you know the dark, broody nighttime stuff has always been part of it. It's not just the uplifting stuff, and you know the uplifting stuff is also part of it. Like there's just there's a whole range. There's stuff that's really more overtly melodic. There's stuff with sort of you know different harmonic frameworks than the standard you know Western classical model. There's this really orchestral stuff. There's the real abstract kind of thing. There's these you know there's all these different flavors.

And so, you know, this particular kind of sound is one that I always really liked. Now, I think things now have gotten into this whole, you know, really dark vortex these days with a lot of the sound that's being played at kind of really incredibly fast BPM. And you know, a lot of—I mean, sure, the sounds are interesting, and there can be interesting ones, but I don't get the story. And what I also don't get a lot of the time, of course, there of course there are going to be tracks where you know there's quality always. But I think you know the general framework can be really dark, twisted, lots of cool sounds, and a lot of it's just happening with presets and cool. That sounds great. Let's capture that, which can be of course fine, right? Discovering things by accident, but the the actual shaping and the story can be lacking , and also the opposing elements.

So you know, you write something dark. Where's the light? The right light music. Where's a little bit of a, it's a little hook that you can have. It shows that you know everything is always, you know, there's always more going on. It's never just one flavor. And as I've stated before, you know, that's the thing that really gets me about our scene, I think, is that a lot of the music has such a range that quite often in the same track simultaneously you have more than one emotional framework, or more than one emotion, you know, that's being stimulated, and that's the case here. I think we have light, we have dark, we have mysterious, there's broody, but there's kind of celebratory at the same time. There's a bit of angst, and there's a bit of you know, there's all these different things.

So, I think if our scene is going to continue evolving, one of the things we're going to need is really that more of this balance of opposing elements working together. Which you know, philosophically, you take a look at how do you get opposing forces to cooperate and collaborate? That's what creates peace, and I think that's something again in the music that can help us reunify in ourselves and with each other.

So there we are. Little philosophical extrapolation from this music, as is something I enjoy doing. I will sign off here and leave you with the whole track without my excessive blah blah over it, and so you can enjoy that incredible sound design and journey.
