Artist: Atmos
Song: Klein Aber Doctor
Year: 1998

Hey, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitare here with episode 164 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So, when I say Goa trance psychedelic dance movement, you know, I mean, we're in the '98-'99 season, and things were really starting to expand in terms of what was being played at these parties. But of course, that was always the case before there was the term Goa trance, right? There was just the music that they were playing at these trance dance parties in Goa and then elsewhere. And so, you know, the flavors of music that we heard at these parties then was really starting to expand.

And this is a perfect example —a track that was very influential. It's a real favorite from the '99 era and ever since, and it really put this producer on the map. And I have some things to say about you know this incredible track, and also the the varieties, the genres, which is really hard to pronounce in English. That beautiful French word of these, you know, styles or flavors, frameworks of the different musical styles and languages that we have in our scene.

And so today I am featuring Atmos and his legendary track that came out on Flying Rhino in March '99, Klein Aber Doctor, which means small but doctor, which you know, not entirely sure what that means. The spoken sample in that did a little search online and found a translation. It was a little bit of a message to a doctor. Says, please be careful with my private parts. So not sure how small relates to that, but there we go. So that's what the little sample is in this track, and there's a lot to this track that really hits hard. No pun intended.

It's a really powerful one in an understated way because it is slower, and it is groovier, and it is a long build, and so it is really quite a magical one. And it, I think , was part of a trend, and I think it played a role in the evolution of certain style of music that people began to play more and more at these events.

Now, Tomasz Balicki, who is, by the way, he's Polish-born but is from Sweden, and so you know he's known as a Swedish producer, and I'm assuming that Atmos is rearranging the letters of Tomasz, but maybe I'm wrong. He said that apparently he sent this track out to six different labels, and James Monro Flying Rhino was the only one who responded. And boy, did he have a hit on his hands here! So this came out on their Slipstream compilation, and then it was on a vinyl with some alternate, you know, with some remixes rather, not alternate mixes, and you know, fabulous stuff, including the Slinky Nuns one, it's just fantastic. But we're going to listen to the original, and I'll have things to say, of course, big surprise, during and after. So let's give this one a listen, Atmos Klein Aber Doctor.

So, as was often the case in the music, right? Atmospheric introduction with a few sounds. Love that buzzing. And you know, in context, any of these sounds just sound incredible on a big system. Now, notice the offbeat bass single note, right? And then the kick comes in, and we have that offbeat, syncopated bassline. Just one note. So things are getting fairly simple here, and simple can be really powerful. And then we have just some other noises, and then that. And again, you know, we're looking at something that's just one tone it repeated in a pattern, and that. And so we're getting all these quantum noise kind of patterns, which you know, again, you listen to this outdoors under the stars or in the morning, and you really start hearing voices in everything. Those upper. Those upper, upper high, upper percussive elements. I love that.

You know, and there's this affirmative kind of flavor when you just get that note repeated over. It's like stating the obvious with certainty. You know, there's something, there's this buzzing quality to some of these sounds. That's the lady asking for a little bit of respect for her parts. Her parts just listen to the brilliant shaping of all of these things and also the frequency range right so we have that one up there and then that really low growly voice Oh, it's extra little. Extra little high hat ish accent accenting here.

All right, so there's this ongoing mantra-like, right, that simple bass line, just that one note syncopation, and then all this evolution that's happening above that, that bouncy, I see a twangy kind of line there. And all of these patterns, it just really sounds like some kind of communication beyond on the verbal, but verbally shaped. Just that real simple. Wow, it is really doubled up here. So really deep, dark, and growling.

Right, so so interesting because it's got quite an uplifting sort of simple feeling to it, and then it's really deep, dark, and powerful. And then we get a little break just there, and then, ooh, that was different from what we've had so far. Again, just another repeated pattern, and a long lyrical line there. No change. Just changes, doesn't it, with that lyrical line with all the voices that we heard before. Really, quite cosmic, Actually, just that simple two note riff. So again, you know, repetition, very hypnotic. I just love the shaping, that upper step, the way it goes up and then down and you get that beautiful harmonic riff again. And that beautiful lyrical line.

It's crazy because you know there's not a lot going on, but there's a lot going on. Another note change there. Another simple rhythm. This starts tweaking and sort of feels like you can feel the energy going up with this. Awesome, unwinding here still have so many different frequencies represented love that sound of the shaping of this synth rush here. Wow.

Right, so I think you can imagine, right? This was very influential at the time, and if you know anything About our scene and your no older music, you know how big this track was. It is incredible, and you know one of the things that I've talked about several times is the variety of music. And I mentioned it earlier. What started happening was, you know, as these different genres, you know, and styles started coming out, we started hearing really more. We started hearing less variety because people started, you know, DJ started playing entirely one sound.

And live sets, you know, with an artist who produces, you know, a cohesive style, we'd hear, you know, one, one and a half, two hours of one sound. Now, from my perspective, having had the opportunity to hear some incredible DJs back in you know the 1994, 1995, and 1996 period and beyond. But you know, of course, Oli. But I'm thinking also here of you know lesser known Jay, who was running the Odyssey parties in Tokyo, Kuni of Tokyo Techno Tribe and the Equinox parties, and of course Tsuyoshi Suzuki.

A lot of these DJs, they had a really huge range of styles that they would play, and so there was this incredible story where you know you take something of this style and you'd blend it with something else, and you know there would sometimes be more overt transitions that would be like you know we're just starting another chapter, or there would be this incredible flow where one thing led to another, and all of a sudden you're you know at some point you're in a different style of music, and that's kind of what I'm more into.

But what started happening for me—that was, you know, where I was a little less enamored—was where you start getting entire sets and entire parties that are just one sound. And that was the thing that, you know, for me, the Goa sound, as much as people can think that's just one style, there's a whole lot of different styles of what I associate with Goa. And I want to hear all of it, All of the good stuff, anyway. And so for me, this is part of the journey. It's not just this is the one sound, and that's where I think things started going off, right?

And so you know, labels started getting a little bit more focused on a certain track. DJs and parties followed, and this is what we're seeing now. Now it's different at some of the larger Festivals where they showcase artists with a lot of different sounds, and they try to be really inclusive. Some of the bigger ones, the bigger seven-day and more festivals, but I think what we're lacking a lot of the time is that DJ journey, and also that shaping of journey.

If we have a one-night party, where there's that real sense of you know this is the beginning of the party, so this is this this is you know a sound that represents that. It's not like there's only one way to do that. And then same for this part and this part and this part and this part. And so there's a real wave, and you know within each set, perhaps a few different waves, a few different styles represented.

Now of course there's great value in having you know certain chapter or certain section of chapter, a section of a book that's got one sound and one kind of message. That absolutely can work, but I think things really did start at this point, when people started like clamping down and wanting to have a defined style, interestingly, not things started getting a little less free and a little less variety and a little less open.

And the human mind is like that, right? We can crystallize and harden when it comes to something that we like or something we identify with, and say, "This is it. This is the one thing." And so, you know, with this track and with others around that time we started getting, you know, slower. I was quite happy with, you know, a little bit of slower because you know things can get a little too fast, and we need that breathing space.

But when it wasn't, you know, I'm very happy in a DJ set to sort of drop down, have one track like this, and then you speed up again. You know that it's like a little breather, and it's like you're turning the corner, you take catch your breath, and then and you're on your way again. Don't hear a whole lot of that these days, and you did a lot more back then.

So I think, you know, this raises some questions for me as I revisit that '99 period, you know, when we're flying rhino and others were starting to really explore different sounds, as they should, right? And we want this kind of sound. I mean, Thomas is a brilliant musician. This is an incredible track, and you know, getting to listen to him, he's playing the opening set of the main stage at ZNA in 2026. You know, fantastic stuff. You know, you want to listen to two hours of his incredible music.

And I think when it comes to DJ flows, I'm really interested in you know, how do we have more of that variety, more of that wave, more of just one, more than just one sound and one style per set. So, just a consideration for me. I was, I consider myself very lucky that I got to hear so many incredible DJs at that particular period when there was a range of sounds, and they were the DJs were embracing that, and I really learned a lot about storytelling from attending those events.

And so, that's just a little consideration that I got. So, I'm going to wrap up About this episode, I'm just going to make a little note here that I am going into my annual meditation retreat this week, so there will not be an episode on the regular day next week. It's going to be on Friday instead of Thursday, and and then that'll be the last one before the summer trip with Zena, Ozora, etc.

So I will wrap up episode 164 and leave you with the full track Without my commentary, I am Mark DJ Solitare, leaving you here now with the Atmos classic, first released in 1998, Klein Aber Doctor.
