Artist: Etnica
Song: Merkaba
Year: Unknown

Hey there, Goa fans! This is Mark DJ Solitaire here with episode 165 of Retro Goa Explorations, my weekly series in which I share in each episode one of my favorite tracks from the 1990s Goa trance psychedelic dance movement. So this is going to be the last episode for a while before the, as it's the last one before the summer festival Season, and we are still in the '98 to '99 season, and tracks from roughly the autumn of '98 to the summer of '99.

Not sure, not sure exactly when I got this one. It was sometime in that period, and I've just been listening to this version from the CD on which it was issued, and it's slightly different from the one that I've had and played. And this is pretty common , right? Do artists do a bunch of mixes, get some out, and then one of them ends up released, but maybe some other mixes circulated, and that was the case here.

And this is a beauty and a real scorcher, and there's a lot of elements. I think that you know, for 1999, for this period, it's a bit of a rare sound. It's quite a gem. This is by Ethnica Markaba, which was released on a 3D Vision compilation. So French label run by Christophe Truille of Transwave, and you know multi artist compilation, fantastic one.

And you know again, this this is how things were, even back in '99. You had artists from different labels releasing tracks on other labels. You know, fantastic. That's how it should be. That's how it was, and it was wonderful.

And this is a real butte because it's 128 BPM. If my memory serves me correctly, I've just got the file from the CD, and it's not the usual DAT That version that I play, but it's a slow, scorching burner. And I reached out to Maori from Ethnica about this one. He's like, "Oh yeah, forgot about that one," and said it was, you know, when they started experimenting in slower tracks.

And what they would often do is, in their live sets, Play something slower to start the set off, and then ramp up. And that is, you know, the microcosm of that's how the parties used to be. You did not start full kicking by any stretch, and quite often the whole first set was a build up. But at the very least, the first track of a party, you know, being on the slower side.

And I, I always used to enjoy this, and really, you know, the first outdoor party. I still remember that it was at July '95. I still remember. I remember what the first track was, and I remember just that long arc. And you know, DJs played for the set time they were given. There was also, by the way, lots of extra history stuff here. There was no Break between DJs, and what was happening at this particular event, I remember very clearly, was often the case is was smooth mixing from one DJ's last track into the first one, so there was no prepared sets, and you'd say, okay, this is what they're playing from, this is what I'm going to go into now.

Sometimes it started happening, certainly '95 and '96, you know, there would be a break, perhaps without applause, and then a quick start to whatever it is that the next artist was playing. And of course, that would happen with live sets, right? But anyway, was very different.

And this is a fantastic track. I mean, it's a great starter track, and it's great to just drop in at well at any point that you want to do a gear shift. And I remember I played this one at ZNA in 2019, and this was the last really full kicking track before I dropped the alternate mix of Slinky Wizard that has a 10-minute section with no kick to sort of wind down the Goa Guardians sort of pre-party there at ZNA.

And you know, I was doing—I did a few different gear Shifts during the set, and this one at 128. You know, you build up a lot of tension beforehand, and you slow things down, and it it builds up the tension inside, and people were really going quite wild, right? So what it lacks in speed, you know, it slows down the speed, the intensity internally can build differently, and I think this is something that's really important and something that's really lacking with all the mega high my BPM that we're dealing with now—it doesn't have to be fast to pack a punch, and this one really packs a punch, delightfully so. And a little bit more, some caresses and pokes and prods. Right, it's not so violent.

Let's look a little bit into the. I need to get the Goa Professor glasses on here to read the details. So Murcaba is it's a sacred geometry thing, and that little design over there. So the Merkaba is a sacred geometry symbol and spiritual concept, comprised of two interlocking tetrahedrons that spin in opposite directions. Derived from ancient Hebrew and Egyptian roots, it translates to light, mer, spirit, ka, and body, ba, right? So light, spirit, body, symbolizing a divine vehicle of consciousness that unites the physical and spiritual.

Well, isn't that lovely in UAG, as things often got to be in the heyday of our scene, and still can be. But really cool track, and there's a wonderful sample from the movie Contact, which again, I think you know, so perfectly chosen, really the right kind of sample that, for me, captures the essence of what, for you know, has always been in my case with my history, the the root of what this musical scene is about and what the music can sound like. So I won't say what it is now because you're going to get to hear it. A lot of old school elements in this track, really fantastic. I'll be pointing them all out as we're listening, and that's probably enough blabla for now.

So, why don't we have a little listen here now to Mercaba by Ethnika? So, there's slow fade in rather than a clear start, and notice some of the voices, like these simulated voices along with this beautiful rumbling introduction, and then really creative use of the kick, all with some amazing simulated voices going on in ethnic stuff, and then beautiful harmonization. Beautiful harmonization and those wonderful intervals, very mystical.

And again, even those percussive elements, everything sounds like voices, like that. And there's a lot of very simple mantra-like, very Clear direct voicing, wasn't wasn't that? I prefer growly kind of voice, adding some beautiful texture. Just a simple, simple harmonic statement, and it just, you know, becomes like this repeated mantra. Just really packs a punch.

And then those extra levels brought in on the next round of eight. And then more single note and again with a beautiful bouncy texture and it's all sensed also much more powerful on a big system and notice again the blend of harmonic and percussive elements and everything being voice like and that up and down shaping. I mean, this is going back to what we were, you know, I was focusing on a lot in '94 ish. Right, very common element back then. Really gives a sense. Four-ish, right? Very common element back then. Really gives a sense of relativity with that relative pitch changing.

And then this, and then typical ethnicum thing. So this beautiful stem is here, and now it gets expanded. And it's cool. A whole other harmonic musical language here. Then, little evolution from that. Fun little. Fun little key shift there, then with those drums and then back. Drop again really interesting one here and then And Beautiful tension build-up is going to lead into that cosmic sample.

It's the real thing—a radio signal from another world. And that's what this music sounds like, in the right context, and when it's the right kind of music. Just again 128, but this just has people going wild on the dance floor. That three parter. Again, very close encounters at the third time. Roll.

And these key changes are really well incorporated. And the way everything just, you know, they pull back to build the tension even more—it's just brilliant. So that was that climb that's happening. Signs of floating universe here as well. That beautiful arpeggiation up and down. Okay, the final build-up. Just incredible pacing. And just listen how beautifully this is done here. It's like this kind of statement of this cosmic joke, almost. This that's just the way things are. Build.

Was that UFO taking off kind of sound there? Then all kinds of cool. I gotta listen on headphones and on a big system. Lots of sort of whining engine revving sounds going on. Another little surprising shift. And things slowly start unwinding here.

And it's just, again, there's something so seductively simple yet deep with each of these riffs. It just really just gets right to the heart of it. I mean, wow. I mean, you know, I consider myself so grateful that I got to hear back in the heyday how slow tracks like this could be dropped in. You know, could start with that, as you know, Maori was saying they would do in Etnica live sets and Pleating's live sets. It could end with that. It can also, you know, drop one in at a certain point. It's Risky. It's not often done. I've been known to do that. I think more people should, if you really study, you know how the dance floor can work.

And this is just a perfect one because you do not lose the intensity whatsoever. It builds, and it is just this is just magnificent. Everything about it, the structure, the storytelling, all of the riffs, harmonic and you know, textural, and you know, sort of the the pitched but not toned riffs. You know, everything percussive as well on different frequency levels. Everything sounds like a voice, and just sounds you know like liftoff, you know, blasting through you know other dimensions at you know a different pace than most people consider blasting. This is blasting. This is really deep and powerful.

So a real lesson, I think, that it is not about the BPM only that you build intensity. Right? What's happening harmonically? What's happening structurally? You know, the emotional content, and then the tempo can work in any number of Ways, of course, high-paced ones can be wonderfully exciting, but you need the content there. And this kind of content at a slower tempo, wow, just amazing.

So, so there we go. I will sign off here and let you hear the track. Only I suggest plugging in and following the good old, you know, Blue Room A suggestion of lay loud and don't you know be kind to your ears, but do listen to all of the wonderful subtlety in this incredible track.

I might be reporting from the field in Europe. We will see, but in the meantime, everybody have a safe period while while we're offline. From these regular episodes, we'll Resume sometime later in August, and we'll see you then.

In the meantime, I'm Mark DJ Solitaire wrapping up episode 165 of Retro Go Explorations, and leaving you now with Etnica's masterful map cover. It's the real thing, a radio signal from another world.
