Thank you for being here. I know you have lots of options of places to be, to things to listen to, sleep to catch up on. Hopefully, I won't be helping with the latter, but hopefully, give you a little way to enjoy some of the music that we love so much.

I'm just curious. Little show of hands. So, when you first heard Goa music, how many of you was in the 1990s? Hands up. 2000s, for early 2000s. So, 2000 to 2010. 2010 to 2020. Last four years, okay, awesome. Just good to know.

I'll be showing my age a little bit here as we sort of talk about this. This is my thirtieth year in this musical scene, and so if you haven't seen my video series, you really should. Little shameless self-promotion here. I just started doing this series last year because I decided, you know, I'm coming at Goa, and I came into Goa through the classical music scene, or that was my background. And this is actually sort of what I'm more known for. I actually my piano page on Facebook and everything has like way more followers than my DJ page. Won a German music critics award when I was 25, at exactly the time that I was getting into the Goa scene.

And what I was doing in the classical music scene and still am is similar to what I'm interested in the Goa scene, which is what is it about sound that captures our attention? What is it about music and what is it about performance? What is it that makes magic with music? And there's often talked about pre-war and certainly pre-1950 that classical music had this golden era, and I basically have thousands of hours of recordings from the 1880s through to the 1950s in classical, and that's kind of been my focus. What's changed over this period? How did commercialization? How did a shift in culture change our relationship with music and performance?

And I think it's the same thing with Goa, and it's the same thing with any art form. That as things become routine, there's a change in the culture, and there's still always some magic that can be had. But what I'm interested in is the roots of Goa and what was the magic that was there at the beginning, which is still there for some of us, and which is still, I think, we can all sense. But if we go back and give a listen to some of this music. We can actually hear a little bit more musically and energetically what it is that's present in the music.

So I actually write for International Piano Magazine. That's kind of a more recent development, and apparently I also DJ. So this is me two weeks ago. My classical people don't know a whole lot about this side of me, and a little bit vice versa. But you guys now know.

So, two years ago, I released a compilation on Matsuri called Beyond Expectation, and I think this is something I'm going to come back to. But I think that the languaging here is really key for our entry into this scene, because I think you would all probably agree that there's like your life before you came into this music and this underground in this scene, and your life after. There's a very clear dividing line, and one of the key elements is you couldn't expect it. You wouldn't have expected, probably, that you would wake up in the way that you woke up, that you would be hearing music in this way, you would be having these kinds of experiences wherever your consciousness was going and however it was you were interacting culturally and sociologically with people.

And I think this is also the key for how we hear this music, it was certainly the key for me personally, because as a classical music geek, I am the last person anybody would have expected would be playing electronic music at psychedelic events. Definitely, nobody in my high school definitely expected that.

So my entry came in 1994 at this event in Tokyo, where a friend just said, "You got to come to this event." I was like, "All right." And as soon as I crossed the threshold, it was like I'd walked completely into, like it crossed a portal into another planet, where there was a whole other relationship of sound, light, decor, and so on. And there was all this UV decoration, and the word. This was the batik. The first thing that I saw when I walked in, and that's the Japanese word "genki" is for the natural inner state of vitality and aliveness. So, when somebody says, "Hey, how are you?" They say "genki." Say, "How are you feeling? Are you vital? Are you you? Are you yourself?" And the meaning is actually root energy or source energy. So, if you've heard of the Chinese healing arts and you know about chi, that second character is the chi. So it's like, how close are you to your root energy and your source energy?

And I didn't quite realize at the time how much this music and this whole scene—wow, that's noisy—was related to this. This is kind of a little bit like the societal noise we have to cut through when we're sort of in this whole mindset of trying to have this psychedelic mindset and getting to the root of the matter and dealing with interference.

So you know, I think music is something that obviously it transcends culture, transcends time. There's always the expression of a culture that's part of music, but it's part of how we've always broken silence in a way that's beautiful. In the same way that we use physical objects to decorate a space, we use sound mindfully to create beauty, to fill the silence, and to actually experience time.

And you know, there at that time, and now at this time, we're sort of you know located on this third planet from a little sun in the middle of some sort of spiral, on you know in this part of this Milky Way, in this particular galaxy, at this particular point in infinity, wherever that is, and the music, and however it is that you start to experience it, is one way that you experience the passage of time, and you experience simultaneously the present moment and also the passage of time.

And with Goa trance, what struck me as I walked into that event, particularly—oops, sorry—was—I was, you know, I still had my classical music brain on, and I always do—it just seemed to me that this is what all of the composers were aiming to do. They were aiming for something that was beyond their culture and that was aiming towards the future and it was grounded in the present but it was always looking towards the future.

And I was quite literally dancing at this club in Tokyo, thinking of Beethoven and Berlioz and Bach and all of these like you know, as one does, as I do. You know, Berlioz wanted a 400-person orchestra, and I was like, "Well, hey, you got this amplified sound system. That's like better than a 400-person orchestra." And every composer was pushing the limits with the instruments. And here, all of a sudden, you can produce any kind of sound that goes beyond what the analog instruments are capable of. And it just became clear to me that any of the great composers would have absolutely been writing computerized music, if they were alive today, they were always pushing beyond the limits of what was possible at the time.

And it took me quite a while to start to really understand the musical language. And now, obviously, since it's been 30 years, I've had a chance to deconstruct it quite a lot. So, what I wanted us to look at today is—sorry, it's a little tough to manage the controls. I want us to look at some of the musical aspects. So I'll be sort of demystifying, I think, and presenting some of like what it is that you hear. And now maybe you know when you go and listen to some of the music, you'll start to recognize some of these patterns.

But also looking at some of the cultural aspects, because I think there's the set and the setting, the mindset of the dancer, the mindset of the producers, the mindset of the party organizers and the composers and all of that. It's all part of the same package, and you know something that we're dealing with is also like sound is invisible, but when you're at these events, there's a unification of the setting, the physical setting, and also the music.

So there's something that enables us to experience a different sense of unity within ourselves, where you know we're often in settings where we have to cover up some of ourselves, and we have to sort of present ourselves in a certain way, and so it's very rare, I think, where we have these opportunities to fully be ourselves. And it's certainly the level where, you know, at these events with this kind of celebration, you can unleash and untether yourself and express yourself freely. It becomes a kind of temporary autonomous zone where everybody can be free, but we'll look first at music, and then we'll take a look at some of the elements that I think relate to the culture as well.

So these are six different patterns that I find that are really part of the early, especially the 1990s Goa trance music, particularly from about '93, '94 into the late 1990s. So I kind of got into it really right at the right time for me. If I'd gotten in a bit earlier, I don't think that music would have appealed to me as much. And so there was some of these qualities that really grabbed my attention, and that perhaps if you're into retro Goa, will grab yours.

One of them is major and minor chords. How many of you play an instrument? Any of you play anything? Okay. So in simple terms, major, happy; minor, sad. That's kind of how it's often described when you're learning piano on a basic level. Minor chords tend to be a bit more introspective. Major chords are a bit more outward and expressive. A lot of the early Goa music has both of these chords in the same patterns, which is quite rare in a lot of music.

And for me, what that really represents, there's kind of you know, human emotions are complex. We rarely are experiencing just one emotion at the same time. Hasn't happened before that you know something disappointing happens, but there's something positive coming from it, or something positive happens, but there's something you know. If you look at yin-yang, my other job is feng shui consulting, so you know this is really like a big part of it. We rarely have this or that only, and with this music we have both simultaneously. So we're having these opposites that are unified, and I think this is something that helps us unify some of the contradictions within our own being, which we all have.

So I'm just going to play a few examples, if we can hear it over our neighbors over here, where you're just going to hear a few riffs, and it doesn't matter that you can recognize this is the major part, this is the minor part, but I can tell you that we've got both major and minor intervals that are happening in some of these riffs.

[Music examples play.]

So you can hear there's a little bit of that kind of there's—it sounds a bit mystical in that way, and I think part of that is that contradiction and the harmonizing of opposites in the musical structure. Then there's alien-like voices. If you've ever been in that psychedelic state of mind, and I'm sure—well, I won't say that I'm sure necessarily—but there's a different way of hearing the music, and a lot of this music seems to simulate voices. And so there's patterns of speech, but because it's not actual human speech and it's music, when you're in that really creative frame of mind, it seems as if there's a message that's being communicated to you.

I'll just point out as well, then we're going to hear another example of this later, that you know when you're listening on small systems versus listening on big systems, it's a very different experience. So you listen at home, you know your body is bigger than the speakers. You listen at an event, the speakers are way bigger than your body. So your whole relationship with the sounds is different, right? And so we've got the bleed through from the neighbors, and we've also got a sort of smaller system here. So just, I think the examples that I've chosen will help give you this whole sense of like we're hearing some voices in some other language that we don't speak, but it's musical. And the way these ones are inflected, they almost mirror human speech, but not quite.

[Music example plays.]

Get what I mean? See. Get what I mean? There's a fun meme that's going around that said, with some aliens in a UFO, and they're sort of saying, it's like, "We've tried communicating with them, but they think it's psychedelic trance."

So, there's also patterns that sometimes it sounds like a formula. So again, when you're hearing it on a big system, it's going to be quite different. But what it sounds like when you're in again that creative state and you're hearing it on a big system, it's like these patterns sound almost like a mathematical equation or a message.

[Rhythmystec's "Stellium" plays.]

This is actually the first video I did in my series. That's the first track I did because that one, we were there in 1995. The internet didn't exist, and we absolutely had the sense that we're downloading information. That there's like this code that's like being beamed down, and this pattern is actually like some information that we're absorbing. And that particular one, we didn't know the names of the music. We didn't know any of this sort of stuff. And I went up to a friend of mine after, at this event where this DJ played this, and we both knew this was our favorite track. And he said, "Did you hear it? He played it!" Like, it was just like this thing. Like we knew there was that one, that one track, that magical track with that message. It was magical days.

Up and down figurations. This is something that, in particular, is I think really absent from the music nowadays. Again, because we're experiencing through time, we're experiencing change, and there's the consistency of yourself as things are changing. This whole thing of things go up, things go down. It's like the shape of a wave, and there's pitch, meaning things are low, things are high, but it's not like a note on a piano where it's like something you would sing. But you have the relative lowness and highness of sounds that's changing. And again, this is I think really missing in the music today, and it would be great if producers brought it back.

[Music example plays.]

So again, it's like you're hearing music, but it's not something you could do with an analog instrument, because those would always have notes. So you have the sense of the changing sort of shifts between high frequencies and low frequencies, together with musical notes that you could play on another musical instrument. So it gives, again, a sense of transcending the normal tonality that we have in most Earthbound music. Bassline patterns.

So there's a lot of talk about this now because there's kind of a regularity of bassline in a lot of the newer music, where it's what some have called the Lone Ranger bassline of da da da da da da da da. There were a lot more options way back in the day. There still are now, and I want to name that. You know, even though I've got my walking stick, this is not to sort of shake my fist and say everything was better in the past, and everything sucks now. It's not quite it, a little bit, but not quite, because there is great stuff happening now, and I'm going to play some of that afterwards to show there is really new music that's really encapsulating the spirit and also some of these elements of the older music.

But I'm going to play a few classic basslines from some iconic tracks back in the 1990s, and again, you'll just hear some of the variety. Now, the first one, by the way, comes from Juno Reactor's third album, released in 1997, and this was featured in the 2003 second Matrix movie. Six years later, and it was still futuristic, and it still is.

[Juno Reactor's "Komit" plays.]

Probably the greatest bassline ever written. X-Dream's "Coming Soon."

[X-Dream's "Coming Soon" plays.]

All right, so producers, come on, that's the sort of stuff you can do. And then consciousness-expanding samples. A lot of the producers from the 1990s told me that they were specifically choosing phrases they chose from movies or from other things that were specifically meant to trigger people in a receptive state to open their mindset beyond normal parameters. So we're going to hear a few of these samples again from the '94–'96 period.

[Music samples play.]

"A thousand planets out there."

"Are you aware of life on another planet?"

"All channels and frequencies clear."

"I am now where man will be, approximately one million years from today."

"Are these the sounds of a music that has come to us across the vastness of space?"

"It is possible that life exists elsewhere, isn't it?"

"Do we really want to know about the future?"

"I live for this moment here."

So all things that are meant to sort of put you into thinking beyond the normal frameworks of our society, which this music, of course, by definition does, because the instruments are not sort of mainstream instruments that we grew up playing, and are not really part of our analog reality. So I think the creative spirit of the producers at the time was also something. This was new for them as well. So it was new and exciting for the people on the dance floor, and it was equally new and exciting for the producers who were taking their own experience as dancers. A lot of them going to Goa and places like that for the first time and having their minds blown, sort of witnessing sunrises when you would normally be in bed and listening to music that sounds like it's being beamed down from another planet, and it was all new for them, and they were really curious.

They said they didn't know what they were doing. Now, there's a lot of philosophical lessons. I mean, how you do anything is how you do everything, and if you think about, you know, there's a lot of stuff in our lives we don't know what we're doing, but when you do it anyway, you start learning, and that's where synchronicity can come in. You start to get some information. You know, you're connected to the field of consciousness, to the whole field of existence. And when we know, and when we're certain that we know, and we've certainly in the last four or five years been coming across more of this globally and culturally and sociologically, people are very certain that they know the truth, right? Maybe. And what happens if you're willing to know something and also not fully know, and you work with what you know, and then you see and you experiment? That's really something that these producers were doing, and I think that curiosity enabled them to discover things by accident, like the second one. We try to do something, but then something else happened. I'm trying to get this certain sound, and oh, wow, that sound is even better than what I imagined. Let's go with that. So when you don't know and you're experimenting, some new opportunity can present itself. Which then, for us on the dance floor, if that's the thought pattern or the energy that you're listening to through the music, you start experiencing something new in the moment as well.

Let's actually take a look at: is music just as waveforms carrying thought carrying the energy of the producers at the time of their creation, and that's what we're experiencing—not just the sounds—and then, as we'll be looking at in a little bit, what's happening for the performers as well. I think that also influences the mindset of the DJ, the performers, and musicians on stage is also going to influence how it is that you hear and experience the music.

And the luxury of limitation. This is a great quote from Matt Coldrick of The Green Nuns of the Revolution when he said, "You know, we didn't have studios with tons of equipment. We had maybe a few synthesizers, and you know, somebody would come over and bring another one. But because we were limited by what we had, we had to be creative with what we were going to do. So you know, luxury of limitation could be okay. This is as much money as I've got until my next paycheck. How creative am I going to get with how it is that I cook my food and figure things out, right?" So there can be—to look at limitation as a luxury, I think first of all is a great philosophy, but this is something that was part of the creative essence. They weren't able to do just anything, except in a sense they did, because they used the limitation to be able to do something. That's how all the producers ended up sounding different. They all had different kinds of studios with different equipment, and they had their own different sensibilities, and so the artists did not sound the same. Right? So that luxury of limitation can actually be a blessing.

And that's the thing that's different now, right? On the left, we got Simon Posford with his famous 32-channel Mackie mixer that he always did his great live sets with. And then on the right, you know, everybody's programming everything on the computer, and it's not really hands-on. There's a separation, and there's an interface. The fact that there's less spontaneity going on in the process of creation and recording the music became clear to me when Simon did his ambient album during COVID, Flux & Contemplation, where he did everything live. This is the first thing he's done fully live since the 1990s, and from the first note of each thing, I could not stop listening, and he was sending me drafts of what he was doing. I write all the press releases for Twisted as well, and he sent me, like, he did 50-minute mixes, like five-zero-minute mixes of, like, one track, and I could not stop listening because he was so involved in the process that that involvement translated into the listener's experience, and I find that with a lot of the music from back then, it wasn't they hit, you know, render, and the computer file gets programmed. Every second of the track that you're listening to, they were actively doing something, and so there was something where they were involved in each second. And I think that involvement as well adds something to the experience of the listener.

So that's some of the musical stuff as well as some of the mindset. I think there's also the set and setting, which is something that psychedelic proponents talk about in terms of you know where are you physically in the outer world and where are you in your inner world and I think that's also something that's really important for events. I always had the sense when I first started going to these events that it was like this kind of secret society like there's a few people like you know you just hear from word of mouth that there's this really cool event you got to go hear this and this is wild music and it's like really cool and there was like this ritualistic reset, where you would step aside from the normal framework of society, and you would just reset. You'd shake, you know, like if you watch animals, you know, when ducks have a fight, they'll shake their feathers off, right? And they'll let go of the energy, and then they go about their day. They don't carry their stress like human beings do. And this was kind of a way where, you know, on the dance floor, you get to sort of listen to this electroshock therapy kind of stuff, and you release basically your stress.

The UV-active decor and clothing. Something about this is, Olli told me—Olli, Space Tribe. How many of you heard of Space Tribe? You know the clothing, this like really wild, colorful stuff. It's not his, but it's similar. He told me that specifically they went for UV lighting because visually, you're seeing outside the normal spectrum, and his intention with that is that then mentally and spiritually and emotionally, you're also seeing beyond the normal parameters. Right? The visible spectrum is a very narrow band of what's going on. So if you're in that psychedelic frame of mind, where already the normal parameters are loosened, and then visually, you're seeing colors that you normally wouldn't see with your eyes. It's translating into your whole experience going beyond the normal parameters of society, there's also with the clothing. What I really like about this is the sense of movement—is that you're seeing like color and action and moving—and so geometric and fractal patterning. Again, we're looking at what's beyond the normal way that we see things.

As a feng shui consultant, I can tell you, nature has a form of technology. It just happens to be analog and not digital, but there is a technology to how everything is structured, and there are fractal patterns that we find in you know the Fibonacci sequence and so on.

And so, you know, this was the regular parties I was going to in Tokyo. Was this? You had a membership card to go into your secret society, you know. And you know, these flyers are from 1995, which is pretty cutting edge, I think, design for back then. Notice how there's no DJs' photos. You didn't know what the DJ looked like. You didn't care. The official photographers. You didn't see the DJ booth. First three months or four months of parties, I didn't know there was a DJ. Didn't know there was a DJ booth. It was like I was just like, where's this music coming from, right? This is my favorite flyer. Look at that beautiful artistic sort of photocopy situation. You don't care about the flyer when you're going and you're witnessing a hundred birds flying at the snow peak of Mount Fuji and it's the sun breaking out of Mount Fuji. Like you don't care about the flyer, right?

What's also interesting though is you know back then, sorry, I just go back a sec. Oops, whoop. Oh, jumped a little bit more. How cool. You had to go to this club six, five days before the event at night to buy your ticket. Otherwise, that was it. So you had to go. You had to make the time. You had to make the effort. And so the energy that you were putting into having the experience as well. It wasn't just they're doing the experience. I just show up. I just click and buy and blah blah blah. No, you were actually going to some effort. And then you had to take this train to the middle of nowhere. And then they had a bus that would take you to the middle of nowhere. And you were stuck at the party, and if you didn't like the music, too bad. You danced through it, and so you actually then learned how to like appreciate music that you might not automatically be drawn to, right? So there was a whole part and parcel of the package, and so the flyer really didn't matter, right? This wasn't like the clothing didn't matter; it was the substance and what was being offered, which was 500 people in a field crying because you know at this beautiful sunrise, but you know outdoors wasn't always possible, so there were regular clubs where you'd have this event with the UV lighting.

But you know when you see, this is a little bit like in Chinese paintings. I'm bringing in my feng shui stuff here. You see how small the people are compared to the nature, and there was a whole sense of you're in relationship with these larger forces. When you're hearing this outside, and there's this kind of irony of listening to technological music in nature that connects you to the fact that, again, nature and consciousness is a kind of technology. There is a way that things work, even if we don't necessarily understand it. Y'all are using computers and phones and everything, even though you don't understand the mechanics. The technology's there, and you can use it. We're all using our consciousness, even if we don't necessarily know all the particulars, and so when you're in that natural state, again, you start connecting with, hey, what if there are beings somewhere else with this kind of technology, and what if we can start to appreciate again the technology of the environment that we actually already live in, and so you know when you had these DJ towers like this, I mean, I literally had the image back then that it was like this satellite transmission, and you were either tuning in to signals coming down, or you were beaming them up. And there was again, this was pre-download existence, pre-internet, and all of that. It was a very clear signal that a lot of people had.

And you know, I mean, Juno Reactor's iconic first album. This is the first album that could be considered part of Goa trance, even though they were always a little bit outside. And you know, Transmissions, and you know those great pointy pyramids that there's all kinds of ideas about what they might have been for. I was at this party too. I mean, this is 26 years ago, 27 years ago. So you can say things have evolved, but wasn't that kind of—isn't that kind of awesome? Have you ever been to an event like that?

String decoration done by this amazing guy Avikal, who's just an incredible, incredible guy. That was in the daytime, yeah. So that was pretty much how we were experiencing a lot of wow. But again, in nature, so it's very, very different. You have this man-made stuff, you have this geometrical stuff coexisting with nature, and then it's like, okay, how can we as humans live in a technologically advanced society but also be in harmony with nature?

Now, when it comes to the DJ's character and perspective reframing the music. I talked a little bit about how you know the mindset of the producers and their involvement actually sort of brings in some certain energy into the music. And Olli was my gateway DJ. He was that first event that I went to, and he was always kind of this real symbol for me of the whole movement, because he really designed that whole concept of the UV clothing, the UV batiks, and also the music, and this whole sense of a shamanic journey—that there was one story from you know beginning, middle, and end—that went along with that whole journey that one has in that psychedelic state. And he would—I mean, I think any DJ can theoretically do what they did, but him being so iconic and who he was, he would walk out onto the stage, per se. At times, he was playing with other musicians, and you could hear the ceiling start to lift. And I swear, the second he put on the first track, it was like the roof blew off the place. It was absolutely completely different. And he would play music, and it did not sound the same as when other DJs played the same tracks. And I knew people who were like, "Oh, I don't like this track." And then Olli was playing it, and they were like dancing their brains out on the dance floor, and I was like nudging them, you know. I was like, "See what I mean?"

Tsuyoshi is another one who's going to be playing again tomorrow and with Prana. He's been at this 30-plus years and is still a legend and an icon. And I'm pleased to be able to work with him at Matsuri. And I remember this occasion at the event, you know, where the people were really small and there was a tipi there. I was with a friend, and we heard the start of a track, and we just said, "Tsuyoshi just started." It wasn't his music; it wasn't Prana, and we just heard. He was supposed to be playing later, but this definitely has to be him. And he was selling clothes. He packed up his shop. We walk over the DJ booth, and sure enough, Tsuyoshi's behind the decks. We could just feel the energy that this was him, and apparently he—they changed the time slot. He was supposed to play middle of the night, and then he starts playing at 8 p.m. and he's really angry about it. And you sure heard it. I mean, that energy again got translated; like it meant something to him, and he was expressing something. He wasn't just like hitting play and just playing music just for the sake of it, just because this is what I do every weekend. Like there was some passion that was there, and it absolutely translated. We could hear his signature, even though the track was not by him, was "Pacemaker" by The Groupie Syndrome, which has an opening sample about anger.

Then there's Kuni, who ran those Equinox and Tokyo Tekno Tribe parties. Pretty elusive figure, and one of the things about him is there was always a sense, there was this tribal feeling of what was going on with him. And his mixing style was really basic. He played off of digital audio tapes, as a lot of people back then did. And the way he mixed, it was like each piece of music was like this cloud of energy that moved onto the dance floor, and you absorbed all of that information, and then it moved aside as this other one came in. And I spoke to several people who, without me telling them I had that impression, told me they had the same impression. It was just like, again, this cloud of electromagnetic information that came onto the dance floor. You start absorbing the information. It moves away, and out comes the next one.

Now I have an open-air microphone recording of when he was playing, and I want you to hear. The sound is a little bit rough, but what I want you to hear is a little bit of this recording as you would hear it at home, and then we're going to hear it slightly muffled. But you're going to hear how the proportions of everything and the atmosphere of it is different, at least I can hear it. Hopefully, you'll hear it when you hear it at an event, and you're hearing the air that was charged with the energy that he was playing with. So here's a little bit of just the regular recording of this fantastic track, "Kumba Mela," by DJ Cosmix and Etnica.

[The regular recording of DJ Cosmix & Etnica's "Kumba Mela" plays.]

Classic track. If you don't know it, you need it. But let's listen to it. Now again, it's muffled because it was recorded with somebody's microphone on a MiniDisc player in open air. So right, so there's a level where it sounds kind of crappy. And if you listen through that, I want you to listen to the size of the kick, and then listen to those notes of the patterns. Because for me, you hear the relationship between the notes in a totally different way. And there's a kind of swing that I hear, and a kind of tribal, cosmic, tribal kind of atmosphere that, to my ears, is different.

[The open-air recording plays.]

So I'm not sure if you were able to sort of get a feel, but I mean that it's just the scope of it is so much bigger, and that's the issue. I think it's wonderful.

We can listen to this music at home. We can listen on our little tiny earbuds that sort of produce about you know sound like a chipmunk or like a bird. But that's how big the music is supposed to be, right?

And so I think our perceptions of the music have also changed as we start listening more at home and we don't listen as much at events. Of course, we're listening here, but I think there's also again the mindset and the sensibility of the performer that changes how the music gets aired, literally. So, you know, the reason I came up with the title "Beyond Expectation" for that compilation I did for Matsuri is when we first went to these events, we had no expectation. I had no expectation.

I'm going to walk into this nightclub and start like have my life direction completely changed as a classical music geek and start, you know, doing all of that stuff. And I think one of the challenges now is the more years we've been attending, you show up at events with an expectation: I want this DJ to play this style, I want to hear this kind of thing, I want to have this kind of experience, and so on. So you're starting to actually place limitations on an experience that, by definition, is supposed to be connecting you to no limitation, actually. So I think, I mean, of course, there's basics that we can expect, right?

We expect a safe space. We expect things to be clean. We expect things, you know, all of that sort of thing. And ideally, we're going to have music that we're going to like.

And as I said, you know, I'd often be at events, and that particular one that Kuni played at, I remember at three in the morning. You know, there was some stuff I was like, okay, not really my kind of thing. And you dance through it because where else are you going to go? You're in the middle of the forest, three in the morning, on the side of a mountain, in the middle of nowhere, you dance through it, and you work through.

What's it like when you are experiencing something that isn't what you would have chosen? None of us would have chosen this musical scene based on who we were before we encountered this. So, is our expectation really always going to take us in the best direction, right? What happens if you actually open yourself up and let yourself really experience something, right?

Again, beyond what you already know. So, what I thought we would do with just enough time for this, maybe, is I wanted to play one of the really iconic tracks, which is great now that the next door has quieted down a little bit. It's a six-minute track, and I'm going to give you the story of how this track ended up getting created because I think it really adds to it, and normally in our time it's quite rare that we just sit and listen to music and do nothing else, right? You're on your phone, you're talking to somebody, you're walking around, you're dusting, or not cooking, all of these sorts of things.

Rather than back in the day when things were really boring before the internet, you would put on music and you would listen and you do nothing else. Now this track by The Infinity Project, we're going to listen to the one on the left, "Binary Neuronaut." I heard the same story from the three musicians who worked on it: Raja Ram, Graham Wood, and Simon Posford.

And the story is, they did the first part of the track, and they were having a really hard time developing it after that. So they decided they needed a little help from Dr. Hofmann, and the middle section wrote itself. They were just all on the same page, and they were open and receptive to whatever guidance.

And if you listen to that middle sec—I mean, the whole track is super psychedelic—but that middle section is next level. So I will invite you, if you want to close your eyes, if you want to lie back, make another friend, and just enjoy the music and see where it takes you. This is the middle section.

[The Infinity Project's "Binary Neuronaut" plays.]

How was your trip?

That's 30 years old. That was produced in 1994. So I think still far ahead of a lot of what we hear now, because I mean, again, the whole state, everything they were going through as they went through it, and these geniuses who were in the middle of discovering how to do this as well. Now, again, you know, for a musical scene that is built on highlighting the present moment, it can seem a little contradictory to look back in terms of how it is that we can experience the present moment.

And yet, if time is just one continuum, the past, present, and future all coexist, and the past really informs where it is that we are in the present and where it is that we're going to go. I want to play just a little sample of Tsuyoshi's latest track with Nick Taylor, which is not out yet, and just to show that again there is new creative music that's happening. This is slower than what we generally hear today.

It's got a creative bassline that's very different from what we often hear, and it's got that whole really almost anguished kind of cosmic cry riff that I think is quite magical.

[An unreleased Tsuyoshi Suzuki and Nick Taylor track plays.]

There is still great stuff going on, right? So again, I can sound like old man shakes cane at the clouds and says things were always better in the past. It's not the case.

There is amazing stuff happening now, and I think that any of us creatively can always get some inspiration from the geniuses of the past, and is really worth revisiting what came before to understand where we are and where it is that we can go. So, we have a little bit of time, I think, for some questions, comments, thoughts, et cetera. If anybody would like, yeah.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

MARK AINLEY: I'm going to pass the microphone to—ooh, it's going to pass the microphone to someone straight in front of you.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey. In the beginning, you started with the minor-major.

MARK AINLEY: Yeah.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: The fact that they play both of them together, what would it be like? More like one or two bars in minor, and then a few bars in major?

MARK AINLEY: Yeah, not always. I mean, the thing in a major-minor scale, the difference is the third note.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Ah, yeah.

MARK AINLEY: So that's the third note. So inside the riff.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: So basically, yeah. That's why I asked, because I was thinking I try to write most of my old-school in, like, Phrygian mode, but basically that covers both minor and major.

MARK AINLEY: So actually, okay, nice. That can be there, and there's also—I mean, there's other stuff, because there's diminished, right? So from a fifth you go down a semitone.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah. Diminished, not minor.

MARK AINLEY: And the church banned that interval. And of course Simon Posford used it in "Gamma Goblins." That's that sort of, like, little sneaky kind of sound. But yeah, so it's basically—it's within the riff. I mean, they created something, and they didn't necessarily consciously do it, but it was just kind of what was happening. But yeah, so again, some of those other scale modes will incorporate that.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah. Thanks.

MARK AINLEY: Anyone else? Thoughts? I see a hand over here. Yep. No. At the back. There. And then at the back.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, what is the reason the Phrygian scale is being used?

MARK AINLEY: So, the which scale?

AUDIENCE MEMBER: The Phrygian.

MARK AINLEY: Phrygian. I mean, I'm not, you know, so is the mostly used, I think. I mean, there were—I think they were just exploring beyond. You know, classical music tends to be major and minor, and that's it. So they tended to, you know—I mean, they were in India, being exposed to a lot of different tonal languages, and so I think that was part of it. I know that Etnica uses that one quite a lot, if I recall. But you know, again, it's got major and minor elements in it. So if we bring it just back down to the two primary scales, we're going to hear those elements in it. So, yeah.

MARK AINLEY: Anyone else? I think at the back there was—yeah, next to the post.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thanks so much for this historical work. It's not easy to do. It's not easy to present. I really appreciated listening to so much music during the presentation.

MARK AINLEY: Thanks.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Um, my kids take music lessons. What would you think about the future of music education if you had to imagine a better way?

MARK AINLEY: It's tough because, again, you know, I'm—I am probably more active in the classical scene than I am in the Goa scene, so it's problematic. I think you know it's the challenge between structure and freedom that tends to come out, right? You need some discipline to be able to get technique, but then you also need freedom.

MARK AINLEY: But the freedom needs to be within certain bounds because, if again, if you have too much freedom, right? I mean, you need the restriction of the glass to be able to hold the water, because if you have no glass, the water is going to be all over the place, right? So that's that luxury of limitation that we were talking about. So I think it's the challenge.

MARK AINLEY: It depends on what kind of music that they're into, but you know there needs to be the discipline originally, and this is why a lot of people quit music lessons, and everybody regrets it ten or twenty years later, because you know as a kid you don't want that kind of restriction and discipline unless there's really that drive. So there has to be the passion, I would say, for one thing, and then there has to be the commitment to actually the discipline and a receptivity to what's the reason you're doing it, and also what's the spirit of what it is that you're after. Because otherwise, if it just becomes mechanics, right? We're in Hungary, so I can quote Bartók, the Hungarian composer, who said, "Competitions are for horses, not people." You know, but we have music competitions all the time.

MARK AINLEY: He came in second at one of them. Really great German pianists came first. But you know, that's one of the challenges: is that like our culture is very competitive, it's very codified, and it's very rigid, and it's like how do you get the balance? So, you know, it's part of a larger conversation, I would say.

MARK AINLEY: But it's really, I think, encouraging that balance of like the discipline and also then encouraging the freedom and the connection to why it is, you know, and what one famous British piano teacher told all of his students, and what I've told a few artists, has been encouraging to me to hear that some of these musicians who've been playing for 30 years still get nervous before their gigs. And what this famous piano teacher taught a lot of famous pianists said was, enjoy the music. If you enjoy the music, then you're probably not stressed about the performance or about your practice or whatever. So I think that's going to be one of the keys, and that's kind of the thing for us as well.

MARK AINLEY: Kind of enjoy the—aren't we all here to enjoy the music? So thanks for the question. It was a bit of an obtuse answer, but—

MARK AINLEY: We've got time for a couple more questions. Another hand back here. Couple at the front, yeah. Back and then couple in the front.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you. So, about regretting taking music lessons, how easy do you think getting into music without any previous music education—as a 30-year-old, I'm asking?

MARK AINLEY: Yeah, I mean, I think a lot of people have, but you know, a lot of people have just a natural sensibility, and I think it really depends. But I think the lessons can really—the lessons will really help.

MARK AINLEY: I mean, I think it depends on what it is that you want to do, and you know, the challenges, of course, as a performer. You know, this is why I gave up piano because I started listening to these great pianists who were recording in the 1920s and 1930s, and I was like, I'm never—I have no interest in practicing to the point that I'm going to be able to play like that. I just knew it, and so, but you know, I always enjoyed the music, and I trained—I basically trained myself how to listen and how to articulate all of this, so I think there's ways you can do it, but I think it really depends on what you're going to do. So again, that's part of a bigger conversation.

MARK AINLEY: But some lessons will help if they're the right kinds of lessons. That's always going to be the challenge: finding what it is that you need and what's really going to support you with what you want to do. But you know, a lot of these great musicians. I mean, I don't think Simon Posford studied a whole lot.

MARK AINLEY: He just happened to have a lot of great sense, and he told me as well. He's like, "I just do what sounds good." I was like, "Yeah, but other people think they do what sounds good, and it doesn't sound as good as what you do." So it's kind of you know, there's the natural talent and aptitude, but I think that the lessons can really help you develop skill that's there, right?

MARK AINLEY: It's a little bit like you know, a jeweler cuts away at a diamond, right? And you start to sort of develop some precision. So I think it can help and bring out what's natural for you. So thanks.

MARK AINLEY: A couple of other questions. I think there were some at the front here. Yeah. Someone else. Yeah. Yeah. We'll come back to you. Get a second one.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey Mark, how are you doing?

MARK AINLEY: Hey, good, good.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: I was interested to ask about the future Goa old-school trance scene, where you see it evolving with time, coming back again in the festivals around the world and everything.

MARK AINLEY: Yeah, I mean this is—it's interesting because you know I had conversations with Olli about this, and I both simultaneously agreed and disagreed with parts of it. He had some really interesting things to say because he said you know this is about a present-time experience, right? And there was this whole wave of you know how the music is in '94, how it is in '95, how it is in '96.

MARK AINLEY: What he told me, which was interesting, he said, you know, in '94 you played tracks from '94, in '95 he played tracks from '95, in '96 he played tracks from '96. He did not do what retro DJs do now, and play tracks from '94, '95, '96, '97, '98 in the same set. Now again, just because it wasn't intended to be that way, doesn't mean you can't. Your nose was not designed to hold your glasses, and yet conveniently, if you have glasses, your nose will hold your glasses, so you can always do something that's different.

MARK AINLEY: But he also said, you know, how much should we be focusing on the past rather than actually creating what's new, right? Because the music from 30 years ago is new to some of you who haven't heard it before, but it's also not new music, right? So if you have heard it before, it's not the same experience as hearing something that's 100% new.

MARK AINLEY: Like you all got that new, fresh, you know—whoever didn't hear me at ZNA hasn't heard that track by Tsuyoshi and Nick that I just played an excerpt of. So, you know, that was something brand new that you can't have had before, which is exactly what—that psychedelic experience of this moment hasn't happened before, and it's always completely changing. So, I think it's a little challenging. I think it's helpful to have that, but that's also why, at ZNA this year, for a change, I was invited to play all new music instead of retro, which is what I'm more known for, because I wanted to say, how can I make new music sound like that?

AUDIENCE MEMBER: It was beautiful, by the way.

MARK AINLEY: Thanks. Yeah, and so you know, that can happen. So I think it's again, how do we have a balance with the past where it's not weighted by the past, and yet the past is supporting, right? In classical music as well.

MARK AINLEY: There's been a joke that you know tradition is peer pressure from dead people, which we can say in every culture as well. So you know we don't want to have you know the weight of the past prevent forward evolution, but if it can inform it, I think it can help. So it's—it's a delicate balance.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you very much.

MARK AINLEY: Thank you. And another, I don't know. You're gonna—you're gonna have to turn. You're gonna have to. You always have to pull the plug to get me to stop.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah. Um, thank you, by the way, for doing this. It was very informative. So, if you listen to old trance and Goa, it was very hypnotic, and it really feels like over the years, it's become harsher, more abrasive. That hypnotic quality has sort of gone away. Why do you think that is?

MARK AINLEY: I sometimes have to moderate what my answers are.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Feel free not to.

MARK AINLEY: Some of it. So there's a term called hedonic adaptation, which is similar to what I just said, which is when something becomes routine, your relationship with it changes.

MARK AINLEY: So for producers, when you're not sort of engaged in, "Hey, you know, how are we going to create this? I'm really curious about this," but it's like, "Okay, this is my job. This is what I have to do, and I've got a gig coming up Friday, so I've got two days to sort of be in the studio to work as I'm recovering from jet lag," you know, the whole experience has changed, right? Back then they used to make money off of the music they released. Nobody's buying music anymore, and so musicians have to make money from gigs, which means they have to perform, which means they have to leave on a Friday, be on a Saturday, travel back on a Sunday, recover on a Monday, and then how much time do they have to be creative? Whereas before they would spend weeks in the studio, right, and they'd occasionally do gigs. So the whole relationship of creativity has changed. I think that's one thing.

MARK AINLEY: Then for people, you know, it's easy for us. There's all this kind of stuff that we did as kids that maybe was magical back then, but it's not as magical now, because we've done it so many times, so I think that's kind of one of the—it's among the challenges. I think the loss of major/minor is actually part of it, because I think it becomes, you know, things got like darker. Music got darker because it really focused on the dark, and there wasn't the relationship with the light.

MARK AINLEY: Morning music became mourning—M-O-U-R-N-I-N-G—like a funeral in the morning. Sort of like stopped being that uplifting kind of music. So there's a lot. It's something that I could spend an hour talking about. So it's for another time. But yeah, it's—there's a lot of things.

MARK AINLEY: I think some of it's cultural, some of it's economical, some of it's just the fact of you know repeating experience over and over years. It's hard to keep inspiration when you have a secondary intentionality that becomes primary. Like, this is my living. I have to pay the rent, and I need these gigs.

MARK AINLEY: And this is only as much time as they've got, and it's not blaming the musicians whatsoever. It's just unfortunately the nature of when you start, you know, doing something creative as a business. There's always that kind of thing that can happen, and I think it's in all of the arts. So yeah, part of it.
